J Vis
DOI 10.1007/s12650-015-0317-7

 R E G UL A R P A P E R




XiaoKun Wang • XiaoJuan Ban • Xu Liu •
YaLan Zhang • LiPeng Wang

Efficient extracting surfaces approach employing
anisotropic kernels for SPH fluids


Received: 22 July 2015 / Revised: 17 September 2015 / Accepted: 12 October 2015
Ó The Visualization Society of Japan 2015


Abstract Particles are disordered throughout the entire process of fluid simulation using particle-based-
methods, extracting surfaces through following up particles is unlikely to achieve. Therefore, it is rea-
sonably necessary to extract fluid surfaces called surface reconstruction which has been research focus in
particle-based fluid simulation for decades. To construct more smooth surfaces and enhance reconstruction
efficiency in fluid simulation, this paper addresses an efficient anisotropic surface reconstruction method for
particle-based fluid simulation. First, we simplify and modify the construction of traditional anisotropic
kernel function. Second, we divide particles into near-surface particles and internal particles according to
the analysis of particles’ eigenvectors. Finally, near-surface particles are involved in the calculation of
surface reconstruction while internal particles are directly assigned color field values through the number of
neighbor particles. Experimental results show that this algorithm ensures smoothness and geometric char-
acteristics of fluid surfaces reconstructed. Compared to existing algorithms, this approach is simple and easy
to implement and greatly improves the operation efficiency.

Keywords Fluid simulation  SPH  Surface reconstruction  Anisotropic kernels


1 Introduction

Fluid phenomenon widely exists in nature, daily life and industrial production. The simulation of fluid also
called fluid animation has always been the significant content in the research of physical-based animation as
well as computer graphics. According to the different spatial discretization way, physically based animation
can be divided into two main categories: mesh-based methods and mesh-free methods. In mesh-based
methods, the simulation domain is discretized into mesh grids and physical attribute values on grid points
(such as velocity and density) which are obtained by solving the governing equations. Nevertheless, the fluid
volume is discretized into sampled particles in mesh-free methods. Moreover, each particle has physical
properties and is advected by the governing equations. The mesh-free methods have the advantages of mass
conservation, flexible extensibility of unbounded domains that make them easier to simulate more complex
phenomena (such as spindrift and explosion), they have obtained rapid development in recent years and
have become alternative ways of grid method effectively. Among various mesh-free approaches, smoothed
particle hydrodynamics (SPH) is the most popular method for simulating fluid due to computational sim-
plicity and efficiency.
    Although the SPH method has been used to simulate all kinds of fluid phenomenon, it is very difficult to
extract fluid surface. In addition, how to construct a smooth and flat fluid surface is an urgent issue that

X. Wang (&)  X. Ban  X. Liu  Y. Zhang  L. Wang
School of Computer and Communication Engineering, University Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083,
People’s Republic of China
E-mail: wang1xiao2kun3@163.com
                                                                                                   X. Wang et al.


needs to be solved. SPH method is difficult to construct smooth surface due to its irregular particle
distribution, hence color field method is always used for surface reconstruction. On account of the surface
being not smooth enough and usually having bumps or indentations, it is reconstructed by the traditional
color field method. At the same time, existing anisotropic approaches extracting fluid surface is seriously
slow, therefore, this paper proposes an efficient surface reconstruction algorithm based on anisotropic
improvement of color field function. First, we construct an anisotropic kernel function for each particle
according to the neighbor particles distribution. Compared to the traditional anisotropic kernel function, the
computing method of kernel function proposed in this paper is more simple. Particles can be divided into
near-surface particles and internal particles according to the analysis of the particles’ eigenvector. The near-
surface particles are involved in calculation when processing surface reconstruction. The internal particles’
color field values are directly assigned by means of their number of neighbor particles, which further
improves the calculation efficiency.


2 Related work

Since extracting fluid surfaces is vital for realistic animation, approaches for reconstructing and tracking
fluid surfaces have attracted widespread attention when fluid simulation was first introduced in computer
graphics. The reconstructing fluid surfaces can be divided into two categories: mesh-based methods and
mesh-free methods. Under the framework of mesh-based methods, researchers have presented a large
number of approaches to reconstruct surfaces. Osher and Fedkiw (2002) realized the Euler fluid surfaces
tracking using the level set method. To solve the problem of mass loss in level set method, particle level set
method (Enright et al. 2002) and semi-Lagrangian contouring method (Enright et al. 2005) have been
proposed. Muller (2009) employed marching cubes grid to sample fluid surfaces, while keeping the grid
sampling points as before. Wojtan et al. (2010) rebuilt the grid using convex hull method that kept features
of thin fluid. The following year, Bhattacharya et al. (2011) improved Williams’s surface reconstruction
method by minimizing energy consumption of the surface represented by level set. Wojtan et al. (2009) used
iso-surface building methods to rebuild grids which changed topological structure. Hirt and Nichols (1981)
proposed volume-of-fluid methods (VOF). Brochu and Bridson (2006) introduced explicit surface tracking
method.
    For the past few years, with the application of SPH framework in fluid simulation, researchers carried out
an in-depth study and exploration on reconstructing surfaces based on mesh-free method. Blinn (1982)
presented the classic blobby spheres approach. A new kind of implicit surface equations is employed using
distance of sampling points to the scattered point as a parameter. The values of equations are used to
determine whether the sampling points are on the surface; it successfully realizes surface extraction of the
discrete points. One of the defects is that high or low densities of particles will cause bumps or indentations
on the surface. Muller et al. (2003) proposed a reconstructing approach which is similar to level set method
by calculating the color field function. Fluid free surface can be constructed simply and rapidly by this
method, but the surface extracted is rough and the particles near the surface will cause bumps. Zhu and
Bridson (2005) modified Blinn’s algorithm to correct local particle density variations. Primarily, they
calculate fluid particles’ weighted average of coordinates and radius on the basis of the neighbor particles’
position and radius. Then, they apply the particles’ weighted average coordinates and radius to the calcu-
lation of reconstructing surfaces, thus get a relatively smooth fluid surface that do not have obvious bumps.
Adams et al. (2007) put forward improved method by tracking the particle-to-surface distances over time
which made the surfaces more smooth. But the surface expression using implicit function is time-consuming
when implicit function is constructed. Williams (2008) achieved global smoothness on surface mesh through
solving a nonlinear optimization problem iteratively. Yu et al. (2012) proposed a new reconstruction method
for fluid surfaces. They only construct surfaces at the beginning of the simulation, and then for the each next
frame, they merely process triangular mesh segmentation and integration of operations to previous frame
surface, no longer reconstruct fluid surfaces each frame. Yu and Turk (2013) employed Muller’s 2003
implicit surface method and introduced the anisotropic kernels to the implicit surface which extract more
real and smooth surfaces of the fluid.
    Essentially, SPH method’s core idea is to use summation of neighbor particles’ value in local area to
replace field function and its derivative. The distribution of local area neighbor particles will directly affect
the calculation results and the accuracy of SPH method in consequence. Particles on the surface have less
neighbors than those in the internal which causes smaller density obtained by SPH formula. Worse still, it
Efficient extracting surfaces approach employing


results in a series of influence and eventually leads to the surface distortion. To solve this problem,
Schechter and Bridson (2012) addressed ghost SPH to compensate for surface particle density variations.
They create a random ghost particle layer in the external of original particle boundary that modifies SPH
kernel function calculation by increasing particle number within the scope of support domain. Besides, Liu
and Liu (2003) presented ASPH method to solve the SPH calculation of lacking neighbors in local region.
They construct the distance covariance matrix of the particles and their neighbors to analyze the distribution
characteristics of the surrounding particles, then acquire eigenvectors served as distance weight of different
direction to achieve adaptive effects. Then Yu and Turk (2013), inspired by ASPH method, introduced the
anisotropic kernels method that applied weighted principle component analysis (WPCA) (Koren and Carmel
2003) to orient and scale the anisotropic kernel. In their method, each particle owns a unique anisotropic
kernel function obtained through the particle’s neighborhood distribution.
    Yu’s method solved the problem of smoothness on fluid surface to some extent. Each particle has its own
influence scope when calculating the color field. Unlike the traditional methods, Yu’s method cannot
directly iterate over all pixels to complete the color field calculation. Whereas it needs to traverse pixels
based on each particle’s influence range and bring repeated traversal of the pixel, the calculation was
directly affected by the number of particles. Moreover, it requires respective matrix calculations since the
kernel function varies for each particle, which is time-consuming and inefficient. To solve the above
problems, we propose an efficient SPH-oriented fluid surfaces extracting method using anisotropic kernels
on the basis of Yu’s method. We modify the formulation of anisotropic kernels, then classify particles by
extracting the location characteristics, and only reconstruct surfaces by the near-surface particles and
directly assign color field values for internal particles. Without affecting the effect of reconstruction, the
method in this paper preferably saves computing resources and greatly improves efficiency of the extracting
algorithm.


3 SPH framework for fluid simulation

In the Lagrangian description, flow-controlled partial differential equations of Navier–Stokes for fluids can
be expressed as
                                                        dqi
                                                            ¼ qi vi ;                                          ð1Þ
                                                        dt
                                                Dvi
                                           qi       ¼ rpi þ qi g þ lr2 vi ;                                    ð2Þ
                                                Dt
where vi is the velocity, qi is the density, pi is the pressure, l is the viscosity coefficient and g represents the
external force field. Equation (1) is mass equation and Eq. (2) is the momentum equation.
    The theory of SPH (Becker and Teschner 2007) is to utilize the form of discrete particles to characterize
the successive fields and use integration to approximate the fields. For particle i at location xi ,
                                                     X Aj                  
                                        hAðxi Þi ¼       mj W xi  xj ; h                                        ð3Þ
                                                      j
                                                            qj
                                                                                    
where mj and qi represent particle mass and density, respectively, W xi  xj ; h is the smoothing kernel and
h the smoothing radius.
    Applying Eq. (3) to the density of a particle i at location xi yields the summation of density:
                                                   X                   
                                             qi ¼       mj W xi  xj ; h                                         ð4Þ
                                                         j

Thus, forces between particles including pressure f Pi and viscous force f vi can be represented as:
                                                                 !
                                               X        P i  P j
                                      f Pi ¼    mj 2 þ 2 rWij                                                  ð5Þ
                                               j
                                                        qi qj
                                                              X        vji qj
                                                   f vi ¼ l       mj          Wij                               ð6Þ
                                                              j
                                                                        r2
