               Rigid Body Sampling and Boundary
               Handling for Rigid-Fluid Coupling
                     of Particle Based Fluids

            Xiaokun Wang, XiaoJuan Ban(&), YaLan Zhang, and Xu Liu

                  University Science and Technology Beijing,
                  Beijing 100083, People’s Republic of China
       {wang1xiao2kun3,xuliu213}@163.com, banxj@ustb.edu.cn,
                            602980797@qq.com


       Abstract. We propose an efﬁcient and simple rigid-fluid coupling scheme
       employing rigid surface sampling and boundary handling for particle-based fluid
       simulation. This approach samples rigid bodies to boundary particles which are
       used for interacting with fluids. It contains two steps, sampling and relaxation,
       which guarantees uniform distribution of particles using less iterations. We
       integrate our approach into SPH fluids and implement several scenarios of
       rigid-fluid interaction. The experimental results demonstrate that our method is
       capable to implement interaction of rigid body and fluids while mainly ensuring
       physical authenticity for rigid-fluid coupling simulation.

       Keywords: Physically-based simulation        Surface sampling  Boundary
       handling  Rigid-fluid coupling


1 Introduction

Physically-based fluid simulation is a popular issue in computer graphics while has a
huge research and application demand in virtual reality. Two major schemes are used
for animating fluids, the grid-based Eulerian approach and particle-based Lagrangian
approach. Eulerian method is particularly suited to simulate large volumes fluid, but it
is restricted by time step and computing time for small scale features. In contrast,
Lagrangian method are suitable for capturing small scale effects such as spindrift,
droplet. Among various Lagrangian approaches, Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics
(SPH) is the most popular method for simulating fluid due to computational simplicity
and efﬁcient.
    In reality, rigid-fluid interaction widely exists in many scenarios. As a result, the
interesting fluid behavior emerges when rigid objects are added to fluid simulation.
While coupling of particle-based fluids with rigid objects seems to be straightforward,
there are still several issues not well resolved. For one thing, rigid bodies must be
sampled to particles in order to interact with particle-based fluids, but only a few rigid
boundary sampling methods can be directly employed in rigid-fluid coupling simula-
tion. For another thing, boundary handling method for rigid-fluid coupling is consid-
erable. To cope with the increasing demand for more detailed fluids, we present

© Springer International Publishing AG 2016
Y. Luo (Ed.): CDVE 2016, LNCS 9929, pp. 210–218, 2016.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46771-9_28
                                      Rigid Body Sampling and Boundary Handling          211

integrate rigid sampling and boundary for rigid-fluid coupling and design a practical
and easy animation simulation scheme of rigid-fluid interaction.


2 Related Work

Monaghan’s simulating free surface flows with SPH [1] serves as a basis for SPH fluid
simulation. Muller et al. [2] proposed using gas state equation with surface tension and
viscosity forces for interactive applications, which also bring compressibility issue.
Becker et al. [3] proposed WCSPH which reduces compressibility with Tait Equation.
It signiﬁcantly increased realistic effects but the efﬁciency is limited by time step. As
incompressibility is time-consuming, many improved algorithms were addressed to
enhance the efﬁciency. Solenthaler et al. presented PCISPH [4] using a
prediction-correction scheme which signiﬁcantly improved efﬁciency. Ihmsen et al.
addressed IISPH [5], which carefully constructs pressure poisson equation and solves it
using Relaxed Jacobi, which has a great improvement in stability and convergence
speed. Recently, Bender and Koschier [6] proposed a promising approach for
impressible SPH. It combines two pressure solvers which enforces low volume com-
pression and a divergence-free velocity ﬁeld. It allows larger time steps which yields a
considerable performance gain since particle neighborhoods updated less frequently.
     For boundary handling and rigid-fluid coupling, distance-based penalty methods
with boundary particles have been commonly used [7, 8]. However, these approaches
require large penalty forces that restrict the time step meanwhile particles tend to stick
to the boundary due to the lack of fluid neighbors. The sticking of particles is avoided
with frozen and ghost particles based models [9]. In order to ensure non-penetration,
the positions of penetrating particles should be corrected [10]. However, handling
two-way interaction is problematic in these approaches since the elevated density on
one side of a boundary particle affects potential fluid particles on the other side. For this
reason, Ghost SPH scheme [11] resolves this with a narrow layer of ghost particles and
Akinci et al. employed boundary particles to correct the calculation of fluid density
[12]. Due to Ghost SPH is time-consuming, we employ Akinci’s boundary handling
method which is simple and easy to achieve in this paper.
     For rigid surface sampling, Turk used repelling particles on surfaces to uniformly
resample a static surface [13]. Witkin and Heckbert employed local repulsion to make
particles spread uniform [14]. Cook addressed stochastic sampling of Poisson-disk
distributions with blue noise [15]. Blue sampling has the ability to generate random
points and get uniform distribution of sampling points. Hence, the following sampling
methods always have blue noise characteristics. Corsini et al. sampled triangular
meshes with blue noise [16]. Dunbar et al. [17] modiﬁed Poisson-disk sample using a
spatial data structure. Bridson [18] simpliﬁed Dunbar’s approach with rejection sam-
pling and extending it to higher dimensions. Then Schechter [11] modiﬁed Bridson’s
approach and employed it to Ghost SPH. Inspired by Schechter’s approach, we address
a sampling method which is more efﬁcient and easy to implement.
212     X. Wang et al.


3 Particle-Based Fluid Simulation Framework

In the Lagrangian description, flow controlled equations of Navier-Stokes for fluids can
be expressed as

                                         dqi
                                             ¼ qi r  mi                              ð1Þ
                                         dt
                                  Dvi
                             qi       ¼ rpi þ qi g þ lr2 vi                           ð2Þ
                                  Dt

    Where vi is the velocity, qi is the density, pi is the pressure, l is the viscosity
coefﬁcient and g represents the external force ﬁeld. Eq. (1) is mass equation and Eq. (2)
momentum equation.
    The SPH theory is to utilize the form of discrete particles to characterize the suc-
cessive ﬁelds and use integration to approximate the ﬁelds. For particle i at location xi ,
                                          X                     Aj              
                           hAðxi Þi ¼                      mj      W xi  xj ; h       ð3Þ
                                                  j
                                                                qj
                                                                                     
    Where mj and qj represent particle mass and density respectively, W xi  xj ; h is
the smoothing kernel and h the smoothing radius.
    Applying Eq. (3) to the density of a particle i at location xi yields the summation of
density
                                         X                            
                                  qi ¼                mj W xi  xj ; h                 ð4Þ
                                              j


    Thus, forces between particles including pressure f pi and viscous force f vi can be
represented as
                                                                        !
                                       X                        pi   pj
                            f pi ¼                   mj            þ 2 rWij           ð5Þ
                                          j
                                                                q2i  qj
                                                  X               vji 2
                                   f vi ¼ l                 mj       r Wij             ð6Þ
                                                       j
                                                                  qj

   In this article, we employ Tait equation [3] to calculate the pressure and use the
method in literature [12] to compute viscous force.


4 Boundary Handling for Particle-Based Fluids

Considering influence of boundary particles, density formula of fluid particles in (4)
need to introduce weighted summation influence of boundary particle [12], that is
