         An Improved Anisotropic Kernels Surface
        Reconstruction Method for Multiphase Fluid

         Xiaojuan Ban, Lipeng Wang(&), Xiaokun Wang, and Yalan Zhang

             University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China
                    {banxj,wangxiaokun}@ustb.edu.cn,
         lipeng.wang@gmail.com, yalan.zhang920503@gmail.com


       Abstract. This paper improves the anisotropic kernels surface reconstruction
       method and apples it to multiphase immiscible fluid surface reconstruction. An
       unexpected phenomenon appears when using the anisotropic kernels surface
       reconstruction directly (e.g. the gap and overlap at the interface of multiphase
       fluid surface). We eliminate the gap by considering the neighbor particles of
       other phase fluid in the kernels function and eliminate the overlap by signed
       color ﬁeld in the marching cube process. The improved method will be able to
       reconstruct a common surface at the interface of the multiphase fluid.

       Keywords: SPH  Multiphase fluid  Surface reconstruction  Simulation
       visualization


1 Introduction

Because the surface representation of a fluid is crucial for realistic animation, methods
for reconstructing and tracking fluid surfaces have been a topic of research since fluid
simulation was ﬁrst introduced in computer graphics [1–3].
    The blobby sphere approach was introduced by Blinn [4], which deﬁnes a scalar
ﬁeld that is the sum of three-dimensional Guassian kernels [5] deﬁned at a set of points.
Surface are then taken to be smooth regions of the surface are then taken to be a
particular iso-contour of the scalar ﬁeld. Noting this problem, Zhu and Bridson [6]
deﬁned a new implicit surface model by averaging particle locations and their radii to
enhance the surface smoothness of the blobby method. Adams et al. [3], further
improved upon the method of Zhu and Bridson by tracking the particle-to-surface
distances across simulation time steps. Williams [7] was the ﬁrst to cast the problem of
generating surfaces from particle data as a constrained of optimization problem.
    Later, Yu and Turk [8] demonstrate very impressive results for the particle skinning
problem, which used an anisotropic kernels and Laplacian smoothed particle positions
to deﬁne a smoothed implicit surface [9]. But there will meet certain problem that gap
and overlap will appear at the interface of multiphase fluid surface if we use it to
multiphase surface reconstruction directly (see Fig. 1).
    This paper improves the anisotropic kernels surface reconstruction method. We will
ﬁrst discuss the reasons of the gap and overlap, and then give the method to eliminate
them. The contributions of our paper are as follow


© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
Y. Luo (Ed.): CDVE 2017, LNCS 10451, pp. 270–277, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-66805-5_34
                   An Improved Anisotropic Kernels Surface Reconstruction Method        271




Fig. 1. Multiphase surface reconstruction. (a) using marching cube directly with overlap,
(b) using anisotropic kernels directly with gap. (Color ﬁgure online)


• Consider the neighbor particles impact of other fluid in the Laplacian smoothing
  process and does not move the particles in the surface of multiphase fluid interface
  towards the inside.
• Combine the isotropic and anisotropic kernels function to eliminate the gap at the
  surface of multiphase fluid.
• We introduce the signed color ﬁeld method to extract the surface in the marching
  cube process, that will eliminate the overlap.


2 SPH Framework

In SPH, fluid is discretized by particles carrying ﬁeld quantities As. At any position r,
these quantities can be evaluated by summing up the contributions of the neighboring
particles j
                                             X         mj
                                      rÞ ¼
                                  As ð~           Aj        r ~
                                                          Wð~  rj ; hÞ                  ð1Þ
                                              j
                                                       qj

where W is the smoothing kernel and h is the smoothing radius, mj is the mass of
particle, and qj its density ﬁeld. And then we can get the density ﬁeld qs
                              X         mj                 X
                     ri Þ ¼
                 qs ð~             qj      Wð~   rj ; hÞ ¼
                                             ri ~           mj Wð~   rj ; hÞ
                                                                  ri ~                 ð2Þ
                              j
                                        qj                 j


    The pressure p of particle is typically described as of the density of the fluid such as
given by the Tait equation, which is
272     X. Ban et al.

                                             q
                                  pi ¼ kq0 ðð i Þc  1Þ                                ð3Þ
                                             q0

 where k and c are stiffness parameters and q0 is the rest density of fluid. [10–12].
    If we use the standard SPH framework to simulation multiphase fluid, a problem
will arise. For particles close to the interface, the computed density is underestimated if
they belong to the fluid with higher rest density, and overestimated otherwise.
Solenthaler and Pajarola [13] present a formulation based on SPH which can handle
this problem, and their main idea is to replace the density computation in SPH by a
measure of particle densities and consequently derive new formulations for pressure
and viscous forces.
    They deﬁned a particle density as
                                           X
                                      di ¼      Wðr! ij ; hÞ                           ð4Þ
                                           j

   In this article, succeed to simulate multiple fluids with the method of Density
Contrast which presented by B. Solenthaler and R. Pajarola.


3 Surface Reconstruction

3.1   Surface Field Computation
Yu and Turk made outstanding contributions to particle-based fluid surface
re-modeling. Their approach used a single pass of Laplacian smoothing of particle
positions, followed by deﬁning a metaballs-like surface with anisotropic smoothing
kernels. This method is perfect performed at single fluid surface reconstruction, but
some gaps will arise at interface of multiphase fluid surface when used it to multiphase
surface reconstruction of particle-based fluid.
    We will save the particle position of each fluid when we used the method of Yu and
Turk to reconstruct the multiphase fluid surface. Color ﬁeld is computed by the particle
position and density. This method is designed to capture the density more accurately by
allowing the smoothing kernels to be anisotropic. We analysis of the causes of the gap
should come from two aspects. On one hand, this method applies one step of diffusion
smoothing to the location of kernel centers. The updated kernel centers are calculated by
                                               X              X
                          xi ¼ ð1  kÞxi þ k       wij xj =       wxj                  ð5Þ
                                               j              j

where w is a suitable ﬁnite support weighting and k is a constant with 0\k\1.
  The function wij is an isotropic weighting function, and formulated as
                        8                                      
                        <                         if xi  xj \ri
                           1  ððxi  xj Þ=ri Þ 3
                  wij ¼                                                       ð6Þ
                        :
                                     0                  otherwise
