SS symmetry
Article
A Symmetry Particle Method towards Implicit
Non-Newtonian Fluids
Yalan Zhang, Xiaojuan Ban *, Xiaokun Wang and Xing Liu
 University of Science and Technology Beijing, Xueyuan Road 30, Haidian District, Beijing 100083, China;
 b20150306@xs.ustb.edu.cn (Y.Z.); wang1xiao2kun3@163.com (X.W.); ustbdante@gmail.com (X.L.)
 * Correspondence: banxj@ustb.edu.cn; Tel.: +86-10-62334980

 Academic Editor: Yuhua Luo
 Received: 17 January 2017; Accepted: 10 February 2017; Published: 17 February 2017

 Abstract: In this paper, a symmetry particle method, the smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPHs)
 method, is extended to deal with non-Newtonian fluids. First, the viscous liquid is modeled by
 a non-Newtonian fluid flow and the variable viscosity under shear stress is determined by the
 Carreau-Yasuda model. Then a pressure correction method is proposed, by correcting density error
 with individual stiffness parameters for each particle, to ensure the incompressibility of fluid. Finally,
 an implicit method is used to improve efficiency and stability. It is found that the non-Newtonian
 behavior can be well displayed in all cases, and the proposed SPH algorithm is stable and efficient.

 Keywords: symmetry; cooperation visualization; smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPHs);
 non-Newtonian fluid; implicit method




1. Introduction
      Non-Newtonian fluid is widely presented in industry, mining engineering, food processing, and
many other fields in cases such as pit filled paste, blood, honey, etc. However, the physical nature
of non-Newtonian fluid is very complicated. It is pretty difficult to exactly simulate non-Newtonian
fluid. A non-Newtonian fluid has characteristic properties of both solids and fluids [1]. Take the shear
thinning non-Newtonian fluid for example, when it flows with low velocity, its viscosity becomes
higher, and the fluid starts to exhibit properties of solids; while as it flows with high velocity, its
viscosity gets smaller, and the non-Newtonian fluid exhibits liquid properties. In recent years,
smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPHs) [2] has become an important Lagrangian method for
industrial flow simulation [3] and computational fluid dynamics [4,5]. Because of the symmetry
of SPH method with respect to translations, rotations, and time, the exact conservation of momentum,
angular momentum and energy are guaranteed [6–9]. There are several difficulties to simulating
non-Newtonian fluids. Firstly, how to model the non-Newtonian fluid. Due to the non-linear
relationship between viscosity and shear force, the adequate physical equations and stable approximate
simulation method should be re-established for non-Newtonian fluids. Secondly, how to ensure the
incompressibility of non-Newtonian fluids. SPH method has some inherent problems which are the
same as massless methods [10]. Enforcing incompressibility for particle methods is a challenging
problem [11]. Thirdly, how to improve the efficiency of simulation. Due to the complicated
physical equations of non-Newtonian fluids, a small time step is necessary, which proves to be
rather time-consuming.
      A novel non-Newtonian fluid simulation method for SPH is proposed in this article. The viscous
liquid is modeled by a non-Newtonian fluid flow, and the variable viscosity under shear stress
is achieved using a viscosity model known as the Carreau-Yasuda model. To improve numerical
stability, a pressure correction method is used to correct density error by setting up individual stiffness


Symmetry 2017, 9, 26; doi:10.3390/sym9020026                                  www.mdpi.com/journal/symmetry
Symmetry 2017, 9, 26                                                                                 2 of 13



parameters for each particle. Furthermore, an implicit viscosity solver is proposed for non-Newtonian
SPH fluid.

2. Related Works
     There are two major approaches to simulate non-Newtonian fluid: Eulerian method and
Lagrangian method. The Lagrangian method treats fluid as a particle system. Each point in the
fluid is labeled as a separate particle, with a position and a velocity. Instead of tracking each particle,
the Eulerian method can look at fixed points in space and see how the fluid quantities (such as density,
velocity, etc.) measured at those points change in time [12].
     For the Eulerian method, the main problems are how to model non-Newtonian fluid and how to
deal with free surface. Goatskin et al. [13] proposed a quasi-linear plastic model to control the change
of viscosity in the gradual transformation from a solid to a non-Newtonian fluid. This model meets
the von Mises’s yield condition. They simulated the melting of a piece of wax with this model by
using explicit Euler method. Losasso et al. [14] modeled unified fluids with different viscoelasticities
and densities by extending the particle level set. There are many different level sets in the same
grid region. The exchanges between different level sets can be achieved by adding the pressure
correction process before calculating viscosity. Batty and Bridson [15] found out that the Laplace
operator and Strain rate items of non-Newtonian fluid should be computed under the velocity field
with no divergence; therefore, the pressure correction process was added after the calculation of
viscosity. Besides, they proposed an implied unconditionally stable simulation method based on
marker-and-cell. Even though they proposed high precision free surface boundary conditions, it still
cannot simulate high viscosity Newtonian fluid. Bergou et al. [16] proposed a method based on
discrete differential geometry to simulate one dimensional linear viscous fluid. This approach can
simulate one dimensional phenomenon vividly, but distortion often appeared when the flow layer
got thicker. Batty and Uribe [17] simulated thin viscous layer with dimensionality deduce technology.
They combined nonlinear surface tension and smallest-discrete-surface-area-based formulas and
reserved the mass of unit triangular mesh with the local grid reconstruction technology. This approach
can simulate the physical conditions of viscous thin layer, such as bending and draping.
     Particle-based methods are superior when free surface and complex interface are to be dealt with.
So mesh free methods represented by SPH method have been more commonly applied in the field
of non-Newtonian fluid simulation [18,19]. Müller et al. [20] simulated fluids of high elasticity and
high plasticity by structuring a point-based animation modeling method. He combined continuum
mechanics with von Mises’ yield condition and calculated the displacement and the velocity using
moving least squares. Afonso et al. [21] also completed simulations with a General Newtonian Fluid
model, and the viscosity of fluid was controlled by the Jump Number. The melting process of a heated
non-Newtonian fluid [22], which later becomes a low viscosity fluid, was also modeled by the general
Newtonian fluid model. Rafiee et al. [23] proposed a free surface SPH method. This method can
be applied to Newton fluid and viscoplastic fluid, and simulate the bending phenomena of viscous
fluids. The relationship between the pressure and the viscosity of non-Newtonian fluids was described
with the real polymer state equation [24]. Andrade et al. [25] can simulate the flow of polymer with
high viscosity and high pressure. In addition, the unified molding of viscous Newtonian fluid and
shear thinning non-Newtonian fluid were simulated, but this method can only simulate fluid with low
viscosity; whereas unstable phenomenon would appear when the time step is larger. Zhang et al. [26]
proposed an explicit method for shear thinning non-Newtonian fluid.
     In addition to Euler and Lagrange methods, recently there is a novel alternative, the codimensional
method [27], which is able to simulate a non-Newtonian fluid. This method enables the simulation of
interaction between different dimensions of a non-Newtonian fluid, such as filamentous remaining
marks left on a pool of paint after getting brushed over, which is difficult for Euler and Lagrange
methods to achieve.
                 Symmetry 2017, 9, 26                                                                                3 of 13



                      For Newtonian fluid simulation, the standard SPH has been gradually replaced by a
                 predictive–corrective method to ensure incompressibility with larger time step. Predictive–corrective
                 algorithm was first proposed by Solenthaler and Pajarola [28], which is to predict the state of a fluid in
                 absence of pressure, then use pressure for its conduct correction. Ihmsen et al. [29] proposed an implicit
                 SPH method that adjusts fluid’s density by pressure according to the relationship between density
                 and velocity in the next time step. Bender and Koschier [30] proposed a divergence-free velocity
                 method, which is essentially also a predictive–corrective method that prevents volume compression
                 and enforces a divergence-free velocity field formulation of the physical laws. However, none of them
                 involved non-Newtonian fluid simulation.

                 3. Material Model

                 3.1. Governing Equations
                      In the SPH scheme, the fluid is described as moving particles with physical attributes such as
                 position x, velocity v, and mass m. Mass is used to determine the local geometry of the fluid and
                 assumed to be constant. Non-Newtonian fluids are a continuous medium whose motion equations
                 must follow the mass and momentum conservation principles. The motion equations are represented
                 by simulating the advection of particles. Through the use of integral interplant, the dependent
                 field variables are expressed by integrals which are approximated by summation interplant over
                 neighboring particles.
                      Compared with Newtonian fluid [31], the strain tensor term should be added in non-Newtonian
                 fluid. In the Lagrangian frame, the governing equations for the incompressible fluid with spatially
                 constant viscosity can be written as the following

                                                                dρ
                                                                   = −ρ∇ · v                                            (1)
                                                                dt
                                                       dv    1     1       1
                                                          = − ∇ p + ∇ · σ + Fext                                        (2)
                                                       dt    ρ     ρ       m
                 where t denotes the time, ρ is the density, p is the pressure, σ is the viscous stress tensor and m1 Fext
                 denotes the acceleration due to external forces such as gravity, surface tension, and friction.
                     The Equation (1) is the continuity equation. Since the mass is carried by particles, the mass is
                 conserved exactly. The Equation (2) is the momentum equation. The term − 1ρ ∇ p is related to particle
               acceleration due to pressure changes in the fluid. The term 1ρ ∇ · σ describes the viscous acceleration.
                    Viscosity, which is defined as the resistance of a fluid to flow, is essentially friction forces
               (Figure 1). For incompressible flow, the viscous stress tensor is σ = µγ, where µ is the viscosity
               and γ = ∇v + (∇v) T is the strain rate tensor. The shear rate γ is approximated by using Frobenius
Symmetry 2017, 9, 26 γ = √γ : γ to model non-Newtonian fluids.
               norm                                                                                                            4 of 14




                                                    1. Viscous
                                            FigureFigure 1. Viscousforces  model.
                                                                    forces model.     V: velocity.
                                                                                  V: velocity.


3.2. Carreau‐Yasuda Model
      Both Newtonian and non‐Newtonian fluid flows are considered in this paper, and the variable
