                 Surface Tension Fluid Simulation
                   with Adaptiving Time Steps

            Xu Liu, Pengfei Ye(&), Xiaojuan Ban(&), and Xiaokun Wang

               University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China
                   xuliu213@163.com, 1434497449@qq.com,
                       {banxj,wangxiaokun}@ustb.edu.cn


       Abstract. In this article, a surface tension fluid simulation algorithm based on
       IISPH is proposed. Based on the SPH algorithm, the surface tension and the
       adhesion model are constructed to solve the problem about particle clustering,
       fluid surface area minimization and interaction between different particles. The
       method can make the simulation effect of fluid be more in line with the actual
       physical scene. Furthermore, an adaptive time-stepping method is added in the
       algorithm. The efﬁciency of the simulation is signiﬁcantly improved compared
       to the constant time-stepping.

       Keywords: Surface tension  Cooperative visualization  Adaptiving time
       steps  Implicit Incompressible SPH


1 Introduction

Fluid phenomenon exists widely in our daily life, such as rain, oil and so on. As a
visualization technique, the fluid simulation has important applications in the ﬁeld of
collaborative visualization, and also has been a great challenge at the same time. Fluid
simulation methods can be broadly divided into two categories: Eulerian method and
Lagrangian method. In the Lagrangian method, the Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics
(SPH) [1, 2] method is a very popular algorithm because of its simplicity. The early
SPH used the EOS equation to directly calculate the pressure of the particles, which is
called standard SPH (SSPH) [3, 4]. The SSPH has a good effect on the simulation of
compressible fluids, but it will lead to a strong sense of compression in the visual.
Later, Becker et al. used the Tait equation to replace the ideal gaseous equation and use
a high hardness control coefﬁcient, which is called Weakly Compressible SPH
(WCSPH) [5]. The WCSPH signiﬁcantly increases the authenticity of the simulation by
limiting the time step, but reduces the efﬁciency of the algorithm. In order to improve
the efﬁciency of the algorithm, Solenthaler and Pajarola proposed Predictive-Corrective
Iteration SPH (PCISPH) [6]. PCISPH can set the global maximum density fluctuations,
and use Predictive-Corrective Iteration to achieve fluid incompressibility, and the
algorithm eliminates the limitation of time step in WCSPH, which improves the overall
efﬁciency of the algorithm by 10–50 times [7]. There are other similar algorithms, such
as the Local Poisson SPH [8] and the Position Based method [9]. The above methods
are based on the state equation to calculate the pressure, there is another way to achieve
fluid incompressibility by projection method, which is called Incompressible SPH
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
Y. Luo (Ed.): CDVE 2017, LNCS 10451, pp. 220–227, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-66805-5_28
                      Surface Tension Fluid Simulation with Adaptiving Time Steps     221

(ISPH) [10–12]. The main idea of this method is to use the force outside the pressure to
predict the middle speed of the particle, and then solves the pressure Poisson equation,
and ﬁnally calculates the other properties according to the pressure, but this will make
the calculation cost signiﬁcantly improved. To solve this problem, Ihmsen et al. pro-
posed the Implicit Incompressible SPH (IISPH) [13]. IISPH constructs a similar iter-
ative algorithm by carefully constructing the pressure Poisson equation and solving the
linear system by using the Relaxed Jacobi method. IISPH is better than PCISPH in
algorithm stability, convergence speed. Cornelis et al. demonstrated the excellent
properties of IISPH once again by combining IISPH and FLIP methods [14].
    Surface tension is an important physical property of fluid phenomena, and its
simulation research has been an important part of the fluid simulation. The surface
tension is generated by the cohesion between adjacent fluid particles. Using SPH
method to simulate the surface tension of the fluid is a very challenging problem. The
density of the fluid particles at the fluid and air junctions is too small because of the
lack of neighbors, and this causes a problem of particles clustering. In addition, there
are many other problems, such as surface curvature minimization and momentum
conservation. In 2005, Tartakovsky and Meakin [15] proposed a method by using
molecular cohesion to produce fluid surface tension, which uses cosine functions to
control the gravitational and repulsive forces between particles. Becker and Teschner
[16] used the kernel function of the SPH method to replace the cosine function to
control the computational range of the gravitational force. However, both of these
methods can not effectively solve the problem of particle clustering. Later, Akinci et al.
[17] proposed a method of constructing cohesion and implemented on PCISPH. This
method can solve the above problems. However, when the surface tension or the
attraction force acting on the fluid is the main force, the time step is limited.
    We propose a surface tension fluid simulation algorithm based on implicit
incompressible SPH method. The experimental results show that the surface tension
and adsorption force model proposed in this paper can minimize the surface area of the
fluid. Furthermore, the efﬁciency of the simulation is signiﬁcantly improved compared
to the constant time-stepping.


2 Modeling of Surface Tension and Adhesion

Similar to Akinci et al.’s method [17], our surface tension model effectively solves the
problem of gravitational repulsion and the minimization of the fluid surface area.
    First of all, the cohesion between the particles will be computed based on the size of
the distance between the particles to create gravitational and repulsive. The cohesion
between the particles will produce gravitational and repulsive forces according to the
distance between the particles. Similar to the force between the molecules, when the
distance is too large to produce gravity, the distance is too small to produce repulsion
until the gravitational and repulsive balance. The form is as follows:
                                      X
                             aci ¼ d    mj ðxi  xj Þ eðjxj  xi jÞ                   ð1Þ
                                     j
222     X. Liu et al.

where j is the neighbor particles of i, m denotes mass, x denotes the displacement of
particles, and e is a spline function.
    As can be seen from (1), the spline function e determines the nature of F, just like a
kernel function. F should meet the following conditions: when the distance between the
particles is less than a certain threshold, F is the repulsive force; when the distance
between the particles is greater than the threshold, F produces gravitational force. It can
be deduced that the spline function e is a piecewise function form. In this paper, we use
the spline function proposed by Akinc et al. [17]:
                                  8         3 3                     hrh
                               32 < ðh  r Þ r3                     2
                        eðr Þ ¼ 9 2ðh  r Þ r 3  h6                0\r  h2           ð2Þ
                               ph :               64
                                    0                               otherwise

In order to better simulate the microscopic characteristics of the fluid surface, we also
need an additional force to minimize the fluid surface area.
                                          X          
                                 aki ¼ v     ni  nj                                 ð3Þ
                                                        j


where v is the correction factor, and n is to avoid the display of the calculated surface
curvature:
                                         X mj                        
                               ni ¼ l                   rW jxi  xj j                  ð4Þ
                                             j
                                                   qj

where l is the scaling factor.
   In summary, the complete surface tension can be expressed as:
                                                           
                                       asti ¼ wij aci þ aki                            ð5Þ

where wij ¼ q 2qþ0q is the control factor.
              i   j

    The adhesion is different from the surface tension, which is caused by the inter-
action between the different types of particles. The adhesion of this paper is mainly for
the fluid-solid coupling problem, as following:
                                       X
                           i ¼ c
                          aad                    wbk ðxi  xk Þgðjxi  xk jÞ           ð6Þ
                                         k

where c is the adhesion coefﬁcient, wbk is the volume of boundary particles, g is a
spline function:
                                               2 h2
                                0:01
                        gð r Þ ¼ 5       r  3h
                                              4    þ 16              2^ rh
                                                                     h
                                                                                       ð7Þ
                                 h            0                     otherwise
