SS symmetry
Article
Fluid-Solid Boundary Handling Using Pairwise
Interaction Model for Non-Newtonian Fluid
Xiaokun Wang 1,2 , Xiaojuan Ban 1,2, *, Runzi He 1,2, *, Di Wu 3 , Xing Liu 1,2 and Yuting Xu 1,4
 1   School of Computer and Communication Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing,
     Beijing 100083, China; wang1xiao2kun3@163.com (X.W.); ustbdante@gmail.com (X.L.);
     xuxiaoyuting@126.com (Y.X.)
 2   Beijing Key Laboratory of Knowledge Engineering for Materials Science, Beijing 100083, China
 3   Department of ICT & Natural Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology,
     6009 Aalesund, Norway; di.wu@ntnu.no
 4   Beijing No. 4 High School, Beijing 100034, China
 *   Correspondence: banxj@ustb.edu.cn (X.B.); hrz.claire@gmail.com (R.H.)
                                                                                                    
 Received: 28 February 2018; Accepted: 31 March 2018; Published: 3 Apirl 2018                       


 Abstract: In order to simulate fluid-solid boundary interaction for non-Newtonian Smoothed Particle
 Hydrodynamics (SPH) fluids, we present a steady and realistic fluid-solid boundary handling
 method using symmetrical interaction forces. Firstly, we use the improved SPH method to model the
 non-Newtonian fluid. Secondly, the density of boundary particle is created into the calculation of
 fluid-solid interaction forces. Besides, we apply friction conditions to constrain the fluid particles at
 the boundary. Finally, we apply the predictive-corrective scheme to correct the density deviation and
 improve boundary computing efficiency. The experiment confirms the feasibility for the interaction
 between non-Newtonian fluid and solid objects with this method. At the same time, it reflects the
 viscous characteristics and ensures the physical properties of non-Newtonian fluid. In addition,
 compared to existing methods, this method is more stable and easier to implement.

 Keywords: fluid simulation; Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH); non-Newtonian fluid; boundary
 handling




1. Introduction
     Fluid phenomenon is common in nature, daily life and industry. Fluid simulation and fluid
animation have always been the significant content in computer graphics, visualization, virtual
reality, etc. According to Newton theory, the viscosity of fluid is constant, such as water, alcohol,
and light oil. However, the study of posterity shows that the viscosity of fluid is actually not constant,
the previous studies in fluid simulation mainly focused on Newtonian fluid and they seldom involved
non-Newtonian fluids with nonlinear physical properties. The simulation for non-Newtonian fluid is
more challenging based on the complexity of its constitutive equation and flow characteristics [1].
     During the last few years, Smooth Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH) [2] has become a popular
approach for simulating Newtonian fluid since it is simple and efficient in computation. However,
there are several unsolved issues to simulate non-Newtonian fluid with SPH. Among those issues,
fluid-solid boundary handling of non-Newtonian fluid is a compelling topic. For instance, some
simulations are tried for the phenomena as stirring honey with a spoon or adding sugar to coffee.
While interaction between non-Newtonian fluid and solid objects seems to be straightforward as
Newtonian fluid with solid. However, Non-Newtonian fluid differentiates from Newtonian fluid
in bending, rotating, Weissenberg effect and a variable viscosity [3]. Therefore, specific boundary
conditions should be considered when dealing with fluid-solid interaction of non-Newtonian fluid.


Symmetry 2018, 10, 94; doi:10.3390/sym10040094                              www.mdpi.com/journal/symmetry
Symmetry 2018, 10, 94                                                                                   2 of 16



     In order to solve the problem of interaction between non-Newtonian fluid and solid using the
SPH method, we propose a steady and vivid fluid-solid boundary handling method. Firstly, we build
a novel SPH model for non-Newtonian fluid. Secondly, a symmetrical interaction model is created
to compute the forces between the fluid particle and the boundary particle, considering the density
of the boundary particle. Finally, the friction boundary condition is enforced to constrain the fluid
particles at the boundary while using a predictive-corrective scheme [4] to improve computing accuracy
and efficiency.
     The paper continues with a discussion of related work in Section 2. We introduce non-Newtonian
fluid simulation in Section 3. Fluid-solid boundary handing of non-Newtonian fluid are explained in
Section 4. We demonstrate examples of our approach in Section 5, and finally, conclusions and future
work are discussed in Section 6.

2. Related Works
      Non-Newtonian fluid plays an important role in engineering and nature, with very different
types and different rheological properties. Non-Newtonian fluid simulation can be divided into two
categories: grid methods and grid free methods. With the grid free methods, most of the SPH fluid
simulations are based on Newtonian fluid. Due to the viscosity of non-Newtonian fluid being nonlinear,
the motion of fluid is more complicated. Müller et al. proposed the Laplace form of viscosity [2].
They built a point-based animation modeling method to simulate the fluid with high elasticity and high
plasticity [5]. Goktekin et al. [3] used explicit Euler method to simulate the process of melting wax block
based on von Mises’s yield condition. They proposed a quasi-linear plasticity model to control viscosity
change when the solid gradually becomes non-Newtonian fluid. Monaghan et al. [6] proposed the
Laplace approximation of artificial viscosity and velocity field, which is widely used. Their work later
was improved by Schechter [7] and Macklin [8]. Losasso et al. [9] conducted unified modeling of
fluid with different densities and different viscoplastic by extending the method of particle level set.
Batty et al. [10] found that the strain rate term and the Laplace term of non-Newtonian fluid needs
to be calculated under divergence-free velocity field. Hence, they corrected the viscosity by pressure
and proposed an implicit and stable method based on Marked-and-Cell (MAC) method. However,
this method could not simulate Newtonian fluids with high viscosity. Besides, for non-Newtonian
fluids, the viscous force can also be derived from the strain tensor. Although the Laplace approximation
is physically correct for incompressible fluids, there are still other approximation methods to smooth
the velocity field. For example, Steele [11] uses relative speed to calculate the viscous force. Their
method significantly improves the stability of SPH simulation of low viscous fluid, but it is not efficient
for high viscous fluid.
      In a high-viscous fluid, the explicit methods are limited by the time step. They are only suitable to
small time step. The large time step will generate instability so that the particles will explode. Paiva et al.
used a generalized Newtonian fluid method for modeling [12], implemented the process of the high
viscosity non-Newtonian fluid melting to low viscosity fluid. In this method, the fluid properties depend
on the temperature of simulation scenario. The fluid viscosity is controlled by the jump number [13].
Takahashiet et al. [14] proposed a viscous implicit algorithm, which was improved by the Euler algorithm
from Batty [10]. Peer et al. [15] further used implicit equation to simulate the high viscous fluid and
reconstruct the velocity field from the target velocity gradient. This gradient contains the desired shear
rate damping and retains the velocity divergence to offset the density deviation. This method can use a
larger time step and does not generate the particle explosion. Rafiee et al. [16] proposed a SPH method
for free surface, which can be used to simulate Newtonian fluid and viscoplastic fluid. It can simulate the
bending of viscous fluid. Fan et al. [17] used the real polymer state equation to describe the relationship
between pressure and non-Newtonian fluid viscosity to simulate the flow of polymer with high viscosity
and high pressure. Andrade et al. [18] presented a unified simulation method for viscous Newtonian
fluid and sheared thinning non-Newtonian fluid using Cross model. However, this method can only
simulate low viscosity fluid. In addition, when the time step is getting larger, it appears unstable.
Symmetry 2018, 10, 94                                                                                 3 of 16



      In order to improve the fidelity of fluid simulation, fluid-solid boundary handling is also
an important field of study. There are many trial works on solid boundary particle sampling.
Keiser et al. [19] calculated the pressure effect on the boundary, sampled the solid as particles,
so the fluid-solid interactions are based on particles. However, they ignored the viscous force.
Becker et al. [20] modeled the fluid-solid boundary handling with direct force method. The main idea
in this method is to avoid the fluid particles penetrating according to the corrective location. In addition,
the asymmetric friction model was used to simulate the effect of different sliding. However, this method
does not satisfy the law of conservation of momentum and cannot simulate the interaction between
fluid and multiple solid bodies. Solenthaler et al. [21] proposed a unified particle simulation framework
to simulate the interactions between fluid and solids. This method is used to calculate the influence
of solid particles while calculating the fluid density and various forces. Nevertheless, this method
prevents fluid particles penetrating solid surface by pressure. The problem is that if we make large
pressure for high relative speed, the fluid particles will penetrate solid particles. In order to avoid this,
the simulation must use a smaller time step. Fluid-solid boundary handling for non-Newtonian fluid
brings us new challenges as the non-Newtonian fluid viscosity is constantly changing, and generates
specific effects such as bending, rotation and Weissenberg effect. Therefore, when dealing with
the fluid-solid boundary of the non-Newtonian fluid, the friction boundary conditions should be
considered to ensure the physical properties of non-Newtonian fluid [22].

3. Non-Newtonian Fluid Simulation
     In recent years, the SPH method is widely used in the field of fluid simulation. Traditional SPH
fluid model aims at ideal Newtonian fluid [23]. For non-Newtonian fluid, the relationship between the
viscosity and shear rate are highly nonlinear. This results in the Newtonian fluid control model being
unable to be directly applied to non-Newtonian fluid.
     In this section, firstly, we briefly introduce the difference between Newtonian and non-Newtonian
fluid. Secondly, we explain Cross Model [18,24] and improve the SPH method for non-Newtonian
fluid [4]. Finally, we consider fluid-solid boundary conditions to help the SPH approximation with
non-Newtonian fluid.

3.1. Comparison of Newtonian and Non-Newtonian Fluid
     In Rheology, liquids include two classes, that is Newtonian and Non-Newtonian fluid. Newtonian
fluids obeys Newton’s hypothesis which has perfect viscosity. The viscosity of Newtonian fluid
remains constant at all possible shear rate conditions for a given temperature. Because of Newtonian
fluid’s purity and the lack of dispersion, they are much easier to measure than non-Newtonian fluids.
     Non-Newtonian fluid does not have a constant ratio between shear rate and shear stress, which
means it is unpredictable in how its shear stress changes according to the shear rate with the fluid’s own
characteristics. In this paper, we focus on the pseudoplastics fluid, in which the viscosity decreases as
the shear increases. In contrast to Newtonian fluids model, shear-thinning fluid’s behavior is not stable.
Once the viscosity changes, the fluid structure changes, that is, the changing viscous force causes
the molecules or particles to be reordered. Therefore, the essential difference between Newtonian
and non-Newtonian fluids is the viscosity (as shown in Figure 1). In this paper, shear-thinning
non-Newtonian fluid is modeled by the control equation with Cross Model (see Section 3.2). Figure 2
shows the simulation effect of Newtonian fluid and non-Newtonian fluid. From the picture, the edge
of Newtonian fluid appears splash while non-Newtonian fluid does not have this phenomena for its
high viscosity. Note that we do not consider the effect of temperature and elastoplastic.
