SS symmetry
Article
A Symmetric Particle-Based Simulation Scheme
towards Large Scale Diffuse Fluids
Sinuo Liu 1,2, ID , Xiaojuan Ban 1,2, *, Ben Wang 1,2, and Xiaokun Wang 1,2,
 1   School of Computer and Communication Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing,
     Xueyuan Road 30, Haidian District, Beijing 100083, China; liusinuo@xs.ustb.edu.cn (S.L.);
     s20170708@xs.ustb.edu.cn (B.W.); wangxiaokun@ustb.edu.cn (X.W.)
 2   Beijing Key Laboratory of Knowledge Engineering for Materials Science, Beijing 100083, China
 *   Correspondence: banxj@ustb.edu.cn; Tel.: +86-010-62334980
                                                                                                   
 Received: 28 February 2018; Accepted: 27 March 2018; Published: 29 March 2018                     


 Abstract: We present a symmetric particle simulation scheme for diffuse fluids based on the
 Lagrangian Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH) model. In our method, the generation of diffuse
 particles is determined by the entropy of fluid particles, and it is calculated by the velocity difference
 and kinetic energy. Diffuse particles are generated near the qualified diffuse particle emitters whose
 diffuse material generation rate is greater than zero. Our method fits the laws of physics better, as
 it abandons the common practice of adding diffuse materials at the crest empirically. The coupling
 between diffuse materials and fluid is a post-processing step achieved by the velocity field, which
 enables the avoiding of the time-consuming process of cross finding neighbors. The influence weights
 of the fluid particles are assigned based on the degree of coupling. Therefore, it improved the
 accuracy of the diffuse particle position and made the simulation results more realistic. The approach
 is appropriate for large scale diffuse fluid, as it can be easily integrated in existing SPH simulation
 methods and the computational overhead is negligible.

 Keywords: symmetry; Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH); diffuse fluids; physically-based
 simulation; cooperation visualization




1. Introduction
      Diffuse fluids include spray, foam and bubble [1,2]. They are widely presented in metallurgical
engineering, industry analysis, virtual reality game, and many other fields. Diffuse materials usually
attach to the fluid’s boundary or splash around. These phenomena indicate the shape of the boundary
and the tendency of the flow. The addition of these details can make the fluid simulation more realistic
(Figure 1). However, diffuse materials have many complicated physical natures. It is extremely hard to
simulate diffuse fluids exactly. On one hand, diffuse materials are usually generated by the rushing
fluid flow which is hard-to-describe. In addition, they need to be deleted dynamically because of
the uncertain survival time. On the other hand, the coupling between diffuse materials and fluid is
difficult to be modeled.
      In fluid simulation field, the Euler method based on the point of flow field space is difficult to
model fluids with great deformation due to the limitation of fixed grid [3]. However, the Lagrange
method based on fluid particle is suitable for simulating splash scenes with diffuse materials [4]. In this
paper, a symmetric particle-based method named Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH) [5] is used
to handle this procedure. SPH method is one of the Lagrange methods. There are two main difficulties
to simulate diffuse fluids. One is how to model the generation and termination of diffuse particles [6].
Due to the unstable state of diffuse materials, they need to be defined as dynamically surviving particles.
The complex generating conditions and deleting conditions should be established for diffuse fluids.


Symmetry 2018, 10, 86; doi:10.3390/sym10040086                             www.mdpi.com/journal/symmetry
Symmetry 2018, 10, 86                                                                                       2 of 20



Another is how to handle the coupling between diffuse materials and fluid efficiently [7]. Small-scale
scenes have higher requirements on the surface characteristics [8,9], while large-scale scenes pay more
attention to the accuracy of the description of the movement tendency [10]. At the same time, the
number of particles in a large scene increases exponentially, and the process of simulation will consume
much time [11].




     Figure 1. A dam burst hit a ball from the right side. The 60th frame of the experiment. Render result
     without diffuse materials (left). Our method (right). When the dam impacts the ball, curved water
     will be formed around the ball. Compared with the non-diffuse-material results, the rendering result
     with diffuse materials can capture the direction, shape and other details of fluid more clearly, and the
     simulation result is more realistic.

     A new efficient diffuse fluid simulation scheme based on SPH is proposed in this paper.
The generation of diffuse particles is modeled by the entropy of the flow field, which is calculated
from the velocity difference and kinetic energy. When the disorder, or randomness of the flow field is
large, the diffuse material generation rate of certain fluid particles will be greater than zero, and these
particles will be designated as diffusible particle emitters. Diffuse particles are generated near these
emitters randomly. To enhance efficiency, the coupling between diffuse materials and fluid is achieved
by the velocity field. The weight of the coupling depends on the degree of the interaction between fluid
and diffuse materials. This step is a post-processing step, ignoring the extremely small forces exerted
by the diffuse material on the fluid, and reduces the time spent on the process of finding neighbors.

2. Related Work
     Diffuse materials play an important role in fluid simulations, metallurgical industry and other
fields. Although the regular movements of fluid can be successfully achieved with both Eulerian
and Lagrangian techniques [4]. The Lagrange method is more suitable for simulating the fluid with
great deformation because its particle-based system does not have the limitation of fixed mesh [12].
The schematic diagrams of Eulerian and Lagrangian method shown in Figure 2. In this paper, one
of the Lagrange methods named Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH) is extended to deal with
diffuse fluid.




     Figure 2. Schematics of two methods for discretizing the flow field. Grid-based Euler method (left).
     Particle-based Lagrange method (right).
Symmetry 2018, 10, 86                                                                               3 of 20



      SPH method was first used in the field of astrophysics [13,14]. It was later introduced by
Desbrun et al. [15] into the field of computer graphics to simulate the deformable body. In 2003,
Müller et al. [12] used SPH method for real-time interactive simulation of fluid. However, since the
ideal gas equation was employed to solve the pressure, the incompressibility of the fluid cannot be
guaranteed. In the field of Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD), Monaghan [16] proposed a SPH
method for free surface flow, replacing the ideal gas state equation with Tate equation. This method
achieved a weak compressibility of the fluid by assuming a large sound speed and stiffness coefficients,
which is very robust and easy to program. In 2007, Becker et al. [17] introduced this idea into the
field of fluid animation. Weakly Compressible SPH (WCSPH) significantly increases the realism of
the simulation, but it is at the expense of limiting the time step, which affects the efficiency of the
algorithm. Physics-based fluid simulation and Computational Fluid Dynamics seem to be similar in
mathematical expression, but the two are essentially different. The most significant difference is that
fluid simulation as a branch of computer animation pursues realistic picture effects and computational
efficiency [18], while CFD as a branch of numerical calculation pursues computational accuracy [19].
In 2009, Solenthaler et al. [20] proposed the Predictive-Corrective Incompressible SPH (PCISPH)
approach, using a predictive-corrective method to adjust the pressure by density which avoiding
solving complex equations. PCISPH method improved the fidelity and computational efficiency, and it
made a significant progress in the field of fluid simulation based on SPH. When updating the position
of the particle, the explicit method was originally used for the calculation [12,17,20], which is, using
the speed of this time-step to solve the position of following time-step. In 2014, Ihmsen et al. [21]
proposed an implicit method to calculate the particle’s position of the next time-step with the particle’s
velocity of the next time-step which making the calculation more accurate. At the same time, the
paper gives a new iterative method, and the simulation efficiency has been further improved. In 2015,
Bender et al. [22] drew on the idea divergence-free velocity method, enforcing incompressibility of
fluid both on position level and velocity level. This method was first proposed by Cummins et al. [23] in
1999, projecting the velocity field onto a divergence-free space by solving a pressure Poisson equation.
To improve the ISPH modeling capacity, Gui et al. [24] combined the standard density-invariant and
the velocity divergence-free formulations in a weighted average form and proposed a mixed source
term model. This model can obtain more accurate impact pressure and force as compared with the
results obtained by using either the density-invariant or the velocity divergence-free ISPH model.
In 2017, Winchenbach et al. [25] proposed an adaptive SPH method, which changed the previous
fixed-mass setting of particles and set the best mass value according to the distance of the particles
from the free surface, so that the simulation result effectiveness increased.
      The SPH method has been continuously revised to improve its symmetry and accuracy. In the
1980s, Monaghan [26] presented a symmetrization formula to achieve better results. The method is
applied to the derivation of the SPH equations which conserve linear and angular momentum exactly.
In 1996, Johnson et al. [27] set forth a normalized smoothing function (NSF) algorithm. This approach
can obtain exact normal strain rates for conditions of constant linear velocity distributions. In 1999,
Bonet et al. [28] presented a discrete variational SPH framework which ensures the balance of linear
and angular momentum. In 2008, Khayyer et al. [29] proposed a corrected incompressible SPH (CISPH)
method to track water-surface in breaking waves accurately. Corrective terms are derived for the
incompressible SPH formulations based on a variational approach, which ensures the preservation of
angular momentum. At present, the SPH method can well simulate general fluid dynamics problems.
      As a particle-based method, the SPH method is often used to simulate turbulence and sea waves.
Back in 2004, Gotho et al. [30] combined the incompressible Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH)
method with a Large Eddy Simulation (LES) model to study the wave transmission and reflection
by a half-immersed curtain breakwater. For the plunging waves, Shao et al. [31] presented a 2-D
large eddy simulation (LES) modelling approach in 2006. The computations are in good agreement
with the documented data, especially the computed turbulence quantities under the breaking waves.
In 2015, Shadloo et al. [32] simulated tsunami runup on idealized geometries for the validation and
