Accepted Manuscript


Small-Scale Surface Details Simulation using Divergence-free SPH

Xiaokun Wang, Xiaojuan Ban, Sinuo Liu, Runzi He, Yuting Xu

PII:                   S1045-926X(18)30036-3
DOI:                   10.1016/j.jvlc.2018.07.005
Reference:             YJVLC 848


To appear in:          Journal of Visual Languages and Computing

Received date:         16 March 2018
Accepted date:         18 July 2018

Please cite this article as: Xiaokun Wang, Xiaojuan Ban, Sinuo Liu, Runzi He, Yuting Xu, Small-Scale
Surface Details Simulation using Divergence-free SPH, Journal of Visual Languages and Computing
(2018), doi: 10.1016/j.jvlc.2018.07.005




This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service
to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo
copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please
note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and
all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
                          ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT




           Small-Scale Surface Details Simulation using
                       Divergence-free SPH

 Xiaokun Wanga,b , Xiaojuan Bana,b,∗, Sinuo Liua,b , Runzi Hea,b , Yuting Xua,c




                                                                     T
       a School of Computer and Communication Engineering, University of Science and

                         Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China
 b Beijing Key Laboratory of Knowledge Engineering for Materials Science, Beijing, 100083,




                                                                   IP
                                           China
                                 c Beijing No.4 High School




                                                                 CR
 Abstract


                                          US
 To realistic and efficient capture of microscopic features of fluid surface, we
 proposed a novel method for creating small-scale surface details. In this paper
                                        AN
 we introduced a surface tension and adhesion model to simulate surface details,
 which refined the cohesion term and area minimization term. It modified the
 calculation of surface tension and adhesion and enlarged the support length for
                                M


 cohesion, which makes the microscopic characteristics of surface details more vis-
 ible. In addition, we integrated this model with a Divergence-free SPH method
 which fulfills constant density condition and divergence-free condition simul-
                   ED




 taneously. The experimental results show that our method can well simulate
 small-scale details of fluid surface in various scenarios meanwhile improves the
 computational stability and efficiency.
        PT




 Keywords: computer animation fluid simulation Divergence-free SPH
 surface tension
 CE




 2018 MSC: 03-15, 99-00
AC




     ∗ Corresponding author

     Email addresses: wangxiaokun@ustb.edu.cn (Xiaokun Wang), banxj@ustb.edu.cn
 (Xiaojuan Ban), 787666673@qq.com (Sinuo Liu), hrz.claire@gmail.com (Runzi He),
 xuxiaoyuting@126.com (Yuting Xu)




 Preprint submitted to Journal of LATEX Templates                            July 25, 2018
                              ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT




      1. Introduction

         Fluid simulation is a popular research topic in computer graphics, virtual
      reality while has a huge application demand in three-dimensional visualization
      and human-computer interactions etc. In recent years, mesh-free methods had




                                                                       T
 5    a rapid development and have become a competitive alternative to mesh-based




                                                                     IP
      methods for fluid simulation in computer graphics. Among various mesh-free ap-
      proaches, Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH) is the most popular method




                                                                   CR
      for simulating fluid due to computational simplicity and efficiency. For SPH
      method’s particle nature, it is suitable to simulate free surfaces and complex
      phenomena such as spindrift, explosion. At present, SPH has been successfully

                                             US
 10


      used for fluid simulation[1, 2, 3, 4], fluid-solid coupling[5, 6, 7, 8], multiphase
      fluid[9, 10, 11, 12, 13],etc.
                                           AN
         Although SPH has been used to produce animation of various fluid phe-
      nomena, simulating small-scale fluid surface details by particle-based method
 15   is rarely discussed. From the perspective of simulation domain size, fluid an-
                                      M


      imation includes large scale and small-scale. Large scale simulation usually
      has significant computational costs, so it always ignores the detail effects of
      local region for instance the simulation of ocean scene. For this type simu-
                      ED




      lation, acceleration algorithm and efficiency improvement are necessary. While
 20   small-scale simulation prevailingly pursues realistic effect of local details such as
            PT




      water droplet which needs to simulate microcosmic details. Using SPH method
      to simulate small-scale surface details realistically, however, is still a challenging
      problem. Because the computed density of particles at the fluid-air interface
 CE




      is lower than its real value, which is caused by lacking neighbor particles. It
 25   results in negative pressure and causes particle clustering. In addition, the sim-
      ulation of microscopic characteristics takes a large amount of calculation, and
AC




      has the problem of time step restriction and numerical instability. For these rea-
      sons, we propose a surface small-scale surface details simulation method using
      Divergence-free SPH (DFSPH) that can obtain a good microcosmic detail effects
 30   of free surface and improve the computational efficiency as well as stability.


                                                2
