SS symmetry
Article
A Unified Multiple-Phase Fluids Framework Using
Asymmetric Surface Extraction and the Modified
Density Model
Xiaokun Wang 1,2 , Yanrui Xu 1,2 , Xiaojuan Ban 1,2, *, Sinuo Liu 1,2     and Yuting Xu 1,3
 1   School of Computer and Communication Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing,
     Beijing 100083, China; wangxiaokun@ustb.edu.cn (X.W.); xuyanruiedw@me.com (Y.X.);
     liusinuo@xs.ustb.edu.cn (S.L.); xuxiaoyuting@126.com (Y.X.)
 2   Beijing Key Laboratory of Knowledge Engineering for Materials Science, Beijing 100083, China
 3   Beijing No.4 High School, Beijing 100034, China
 *   Correspondence: banxj@ustb.edu.cn
                                                                                                 
 Received: 30 March 2019; Accepted: 27 May 2019; Published: 2 June 2019                          


 Abstract: Multiple-phase fluids’ simulation and 3D visualization comprise an important cooperative
 visualization subject between fluid dynamics and computer animation. Interactions between different
 fluids have been widely studied in both physics and computer graphics. To further the study in
 both areas, cooperative research has been carried out; hence, a more authentic fluid simulation
 method is required. The key to a better multiphase fluid simulation result is surface extraction.
 Previous works usually have problems in extracting surfaces with unnatural fluctuations or detail
 missing. Gaps between different phases also hinder the reality of simulation. In this paper, we propose
 a unified surface extraction approach integrated with a modified density model for the particle-based
 multiphase fluid simulation. We refine the original asymmetric smoothing kernel used in the color
 field and address a binary tree scheme for surface extraction. Besides, we employ a multiphase
 fluid framework with modified density to eliminate density deviation between different fluids.
 With the methods mentioned above, our approach can effectively reconstruct the fluid surface for
 particle-based multiphase fluid simulation. It can also resolve the issue of overlaps and gaps between
 different fluids, which has widely existed in former methods for a long time. The experiments carried
 out in this paper show that our approach is able to have an ideal fluid surface condition and have
 good interaction effects.

 Keywords: 3D visualization; fluid simulation; multiphase fluids; surface extraction




1. Introduction
     Visualized fluid simulation has been studied for a long time and with the help of both fluid
dynamics and computer animation techniques. There have been various kinds of methods for
fluid simulation visualization. They can be divided into two types based on the difference of the
spatial discretization method, which are mesh-based Euler approaches and particle-based Lagrangian
approaches. In Euler approaches, the simulation domain is discretized into mesh grids, and the physical
values on grid points (such as acceleration, pressure) can be obtained through the governing equations.
Mesh-based methods can create animations with a realistic appearance, but they are time-consuming
and have difficulty handling certain phenomena accurately like free surfaces, complex boundaries,
and splashes. Nevertheless, in particle-based methods like the Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics
(SPH), the volume of the fluid is discretized by particles. Each of them carries physical properties and
moves freely according to the velocity field. Particle-based methods can easily maintain momentum
conservation and incompressibility and have been used to simulate various kinds of phenomena, such


Symmetry 2019, 11, 745; doi:10.3390/sym11060745                             www.mdpi.com/journal/symmetry
Symmetry 2019, 11, 745                                                                              2 of 18



as water, smoke, deformable solids, as well as viscoelastic liquids and multiphase fluids. However,
some major particle-based methods have difficulties in producing realistic surfaces, especially for
multiphase interactions.
      In daily life, multiphase phenomena like water bubbles and the mixture of immiscible fluids are
everywhere. Currently, multiphase simulation is receiving wide attention. While in SPH simulation,
there is a certain spatial distance between particles and particles’ properties are smoothed by the
kernel function, when the static density and mass of neighbor particles are different, the physical
quantity calculated using SPH approach will be biased. This problem is especially obvious at the
interface of multiple phases. The density value calculated by the fluid with high static density near
the interface is relatively small, while the density value calculated by the fluid with low static density
is relatively large. This is because the standard SPH formula smooths the density at the interface
and does not accurately represent a sharp change in density. Moreover, due to the density deviation,
the calculation deviation of other physical quantities, such as pressure, will lead to unreal interface
effects and serious numerical instability. Besides, extracting high-quality surfaces of multiple phases
from particle locations has been rarely discussed. The standard approaches for reconstructing surfaces
of particle-based simulation usually need to create an implicit surface, which virtually wraps around
all the particles during the simulation. Although recent research has significantly improved the surface
appearance that results from formulating the implicit function, unfortunately, there have still been
problems for these methods in accurately and stably handling interface evolutions, especially at the
location where the multiphase interface lies. Few research works have focused on the problem of
extracting smooth surfaces and the interface in multiphase simulation for particles.
      In this paper, we present a novel surface extraction approach integrated with the multiphase
model with modified density, which significantly improves the appearance at the multiphase interface
while keeping a good fluid surface quality. We employ an asymmetric smoothing kernel to represent
each particle. The direction and scale of the asymmetry are determined by the distribution of the
particle’s neighborhood. The asymmetric kernel is constructed like Yu’s[1] method, but we consider
the influence of other phases when computing one phase’s kernel and color field. Besides, we also
address a binary tree strategy [2], which is convenient to implement to divide equally the overlap area
and fill up the vacuum space. In addition, we employ a multiphase fluids model to eliminate density
deviations at the interface. The results show that our method acquires a better realistic appearance of
the fluid surface and interface when compared to previous methods. More importantly, the binary
tree strategy can suit the data-driven approach easily to further boost the process, which shows great
potential in surface-specified enhancement that would be a promising topic for 3D visualization of
fluids.

2. Related Work
      Currently, SPH is a popular approach for fluid simulation. Desbrun [3] started to simulate
deformable objects with SPH. Monaghan [4] addressed free surface flow simulation approaches with
SPH as a basis for fluid simulation. Later, Müller et al. [5] firstly applied SPH in computer graphics
for fluid simulation. They employed Boyle’s law and surface tension, as well as viscosity forces to
calculate forces, which brought the problem of compressibility. Based on the former studies, Becker
and Teschner [6] proposed Weakly-Compressible SPH (WCSPH) using the Tait equation. This method
reduced compressibility significantly and increased the fidelity; however, the efficiency of simulation
was limited severely by the time step. A more strict incompressibility condition would require smaller
time steps, which cost much more time for computation. After that, more advanced approaches
were proposed to improve the fidelity and efficiency. Solenthaler and Pajarola [7] presented the
Predictive-Corrective Incompressible SPH (PCISPH) method that uses a prediction-correction scheme
to determine the particle’s pressure. PCISPH can increase time steps remarkably, making it more
efficient than WCSPH. He et al. [8] presented a similar method, Local Poisson SPH (LPSPH), which can
ensure incompressibility by an iterative process. Afterwards, Ihmsen et al. [9] addressed Implicit
Symmetry 2019, 11, 745                                                                               3 of 18



Incompressible SPH (IISPH). This method builds the Pressure Poisson Equation (PPE) carefully
and then solves the linear problem with the relaxed Jacobi approach. This method has a great
improvement in both stability and convergence speed. Particularly, IISPH is especially fit for large-scale
simulation. Recently, an approach with potential for SPH fluid simulation was introduced by Bender
and Koschier [10]. It combines two pressure solvers together to restrict low volume compression and
ensure a divergence-free velocity field. What is more, this method is able to carry out the simulation in
large time steps, yet enhancing the appearance.
     For the density deviation of the SPH formula at the interface, Hoover [11] firstly described the
problem of false interfacial tension caused by small particle density and pressure calculation near the
interface. Agertz et al. [12] also presented a similar situation, pointing out that the wrong pressure
would create voids and severe instability between two-phase fluids with a high density ratio. In order
to deal with the numerical instability problem caused by the increase of the density ratio, Ott et al. [13]
proposed an improved continuity equation. Although it is very effective for some special application
scenarios, neither the standard nor improved continuity equation can produce stable long-term
simulation results. This can lead to serious density integral errors, especially when using large time
steps and low order time integral schemes. Tartakovsky et al. [14] proposed a corrected formula for
density summation, which combined the corrected SPH flow equation with the advection diffusion
equation to simulate the miscible flow with complex geometry. Hu et al. [15] focused on the study of
numerical examples of droplet oscillation and deformation in two-dimensional shear flow. In addition,
early studies on multiphase fluids included solving a discontinuous interface [16–18] and focusing on
bubble and foam [19–21], which are all based on the Euler method. Losasso et al. [22] proposed a level
set method that uses SPH particles to represent diffusion regions, and Thurey et al. [23] proposed a
foam simulation method based on SPH. Muller et al. [24] proposed an SPH-based particle simulation
method to deal with multiphase and water boiling. Mao et al. [25] simulated immiscible fluid by
explicitly detecting collision particles. Solenthaler et al. [26] used quantitative density to improve
density summation and employed it to correct other physical quantities to solve the problem of the
false interface effect.
     Particle-based fluid simulation has difficulty with surface extraction, for those particles cannot
give any interrelated information. In the past several decades, researchers have addressed several
surface extraction methods for particle-based fluid simulation. Blinn presented the blobby sphere
approach [27], which computes the distance between the scattered points and sampling points as a
parameter to accumulate the implicit surface functions. It successfully reconstructs surfaces from
discrete points, but whether the density of the particles is high or low, they would always cause
indentations or become bumpy on the surface. Müller et al. [5] introduced a color field approach as
a kind of level set scheme to construct the fluid surface simply and rapidly. However, the surface
being extracted was rough, and bumps were produced by particles next to the surface. Zhu and
Bridson improved the blobby sphere approach by adjusting density variations of the local particles [28].
They first calculated the fluid particles’ radius, as well as the coordinates’ weighted mean according to
the neighbor particles’ radius and position. Then, the weighted mean radius and coordinates were used
to extract surfaces that became a relatively smoothed fluid surface compared to the original blobby
sphere approach. Adams et al. [29] modified Zhu’s approach through tracking the distances between
the particle and surface over time. This method can successfully produce smooth surfaces for both
fixed radius and adaptive particles with the cost of excessive time. Bhatacharya et al. [30] introduced a
level set approach considering surface reconstruction as an optimization issue. To obtain a smooth
surface, they smoothed the initial surfaces through an iteration process. Yu et al. [31] introduced an
alternate approach. They built the surfaces only at the beginning of the simulation, which reduced
the computation cost. Akinci et al. [32] introduced a scheme to reconstruct and optimize the surface
concurrently and presented a surface tectonic line approach [33]. Yu and Turk [1] presented the implicit
surface with asymmetric kernels, which are able to extract smoother fluid surfaces with more fidelity.
In their approach, a unique kernel function was applied for each particle, which was constructed
