Asian CHI Symposium 2019: Emerging HCI Research Collection                                                                                                                         Page 60




                                                                               MIPOSE: A Micro-Intelligent
                                                                               Platform for Dynamic Human Pose
                                                                               Recognition
                                                             Zhishuai Han∗                                                 Xiaokun Wang∗
                                                             University of Science & Technology, Beijing                   University of Science & Technology, Beijing
                                                             Beijing, China                                                Beijing, China
                                                             zsani.han@gmail.com                                           wangxiaokun@ustb.edu.cn

                                                             Xiaojuan Ban†                                                 Jianyu Wu
                                                             University of Science & Technology, Beijing                   University of Science & Technology, Beijing
                                                             Beijing, China                                                Beijing, China
                                                             banxj@ustb.edu.cn                                             ustbjerome@163.com
∗ Both authors contributed equally to this re-
search.
                                                             ABSTRACT
† Corresponding author.
                                                             Giving computers the ability to learn from demonstrations is important for users to perform complex
                                                             tasks. In this paper, we present an intelligent self-learning interface for dynamic human pose recogni-
                                                             tion. We capture 20 samples for an unknown pose to train a stable generative adversarial networks
                                                             (GAN) system which aims to conduct data enhancement, then we adopt a threshold isolation method
                                                             to distinguish relatively similar poses. A few minutes of learning time is sufficient to train a GAN
                                                             system to successfully generate qualified pose samples. Our platform provides a feasible scheme for
                                                             micro-intelligent interface, which can benefit to human-robot interaction greatly.

                                                             Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
                                                             provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the
                                                             full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
                                                             the owner/author(s).
                                                             Asian HCI Symposium’19, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland UK
                                                             © 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
                                                             ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6679-3/19/05.
                                                             https://doi.org/10.1145/3309700.3338440
Asian CHI Symposium 2019: Emerging HCI Research Collection                                                                                                    Page 61




MIPOSE: A Micro-Intelligent Platform for Dynamic Human Pose Recognition                           Asian HCI Symposium’19, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland UK

                                                             CCS CONCEPTS
                                                             • Human-centered computing → Gestural input; User interface management systems; HCI
                                                             theory, concepts and models; Activity centered design.

                                                             KEYWORDS
                                                             Pose Recognition, Micro-Intelligent interface, DCGAN, Human-Robot Interaction
                                                             ACM Reference Format:
                                                             Zhishuai Han, Xiaokun Wang, Xiaojuan Ban, and Jianyu Wu. 2019. MIPOSE: A Micro-Intelligent Platform for
                                                             Dynamic Human Pose Recognition. In Asian HCI Symposium’19 ( Asian HCI Symposium’19), May 4–9, 2019,
                                                             Glasgow, Scotland Uk. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 6 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3309700.3338440

                                                             INTRODUCTION
                                                             A major interior of most existing human-computer interfaces is that they can only perform predefined
                                                             tasks. Traditionally they obtain some priori knowledge to "remember" established rules and regulations,
                                                             however, this kind of strategy lacks self-learning ability, and they can’t expand to new recognition
                                                             patterns quickly. Artificial intelligence especially deep learning (DL) has shown fantastic generalization
                                                             performance on pose estimation and gesture classification [5], but DL based methods are highly
                                                             dependent on sufficient sample data. Collecting enough samples and manually labelling will consume
                                                             plenty of time, and technically speaking, training is still modelling some patterns and telling machines
                                                             to "remember" them, but not to "learn". We think an intelligent machine should be capable of learning
                                                             from real-time demonstrations or several samples, and can distinguish new patterns and off-the-
                                                             shelf ones [4]. Hence we design a micro-intelligent platform for dynamic human pose recognition,
                                                             it only needs 20 samples as basic knowledge to learn target human pose. Our designed platform is
                                                             based on end-to-end architecture, and it can finish recognizing an unknown human pose within 10
                                                             minutes. The learning and recognition process without human intervention will greatly improve the
                                                             human-computer interaction experience.
                                                                In this extended abstract, we first present the technical details that power our critical micro-
Figure 1: End-to-end architecture of MI-                     intelligent human pose recognition platform. Next, we show how to create a new dynamic human
POSE. Training and recognition process                       pose and make the platform recognize it. Besides, we provides effect contrast between using our
don’t require manual intervention.                           proposed agent and just raw sample data. Finally, we conclude with a brief discussion of future work.

                                                             RELATED WORK
                                                             GAN has developed a lot since it was proposed, such as CVAE-GAN [1] and StarGAN [3]. Among all
                                                             the derivative methods of GAN, deep convolutional generative adversarial networks (DCGAN) is one
                                                             of the most widely used and stable methods [6]. It adopts two CNN modules as generative network
Asian CHI Symposium 2019: Emerging HCI Research Collection                                                                                                   Page 62




MIPOSE: A Micro-Intelligent Platform for Dynamic Human Pose Recognition                           Asian HCI Symposium’19, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland UK

                                                             and adversarial network. It uses a set of random noise as input to generate data approximating the
                                                             original samples, and stops training when the network can’t tell whether the generated data is real or
                                                             not. In this document, we adopt DCGAN as intelligent agent to do data enhancement.

                                                             TECHNICAL DETAILS
                                                             The offline real-time dynamic human pose recognition platform is built using OpenPose [2], the
                                                             most popular open-source human pose recognition system based on state-of-art methods. Figure 1
                                                             demonstrates the architecture of our proposed platform. We use OpenPose to detect human keypoints.
                                                             When a new pose starts, the platform saves real-time keypoints to a JSON file. Normalization module
                                                             processes the JSON data to make them conform to a specific length. Encoder module is used to
                                                             encode discrete pose sequences into images. DCGAN module uses encoded images to generate more
                                                             synthetic samples. Decoder module decodes generated samples back to sequences of original format.
                                                             Classifier module uses a sliding window to match webcam input stream with stored samples and
                                                             output recognition results. Our platform runs on GTX 1050 only using webcam, written in Python for
                                                             the development.

Figure 2: Regulation of encoding discrete                    MODULES
sequences into images.
                                                             OpenPose: OpenPose can provide human body keypoints from still images and videos. In order to
                                                             accelerate recognition speed of webcam input, we adopt a slight model which can run 10±2 FPS on
                                                             our laptop.
                                                                Normalization: Since that it’s impossible for all samples of a pose having the same length, we design
                                                             the normalization module to modify random-length sequences to 15 frames. It means that each
                                                             human pose contains 15 frames of body keypoints and should be performed within about 2 seconds.
                                                             If an acquired pose sequence has more than 15 frames, we use every 15 frames in this sequence as
                                                             one sample. Otherwise, this acquired sequence is used as a sample.
                                                                Encoder: DCGAN can only process images, so we encode discrete body keypoints sequence into
                                                             images. The encoding regulation is shown as Figure 2. The platform uses 12 keypoints to configure
                                                             and recognize target pose(see Figure 3, "head" is one keypoint), and each keypoint has two values,
                                                             each pose contains 15 frames. Therefore one pose sequence can be encoded into a 19 × 19 image.
                                                                DCGAN: DCGAN is the most time-consuming process in the platform. We have experimented that
                                                             the network can reach a stable state after 300 echos of training. We generate 1k samples for a new
                                                             pose. On our laptop (Ubuntu, 18.04 LTS), it will take around 5 minutes to collect such number of
                                                             samples.
                                                                Decoder: Decoder is exactly reversible process of encoder. Its main function is to transform generated
                                                             images back to keypoint sequences.



Figure 3: Body keypoints display using
OpenPose. The center keypoint in the
head represents the head keypoint.
