Received: 12 July 2023    Accepted: 22 July 2023

DOI: 10.1002/cav.2202


S P E C I A L I S S U E PA P E R




Efficient and high precision target-driven fluid simulation
based on spatial geometry features

Xiangyang Zhou1,2,3                        Sinuo Liu1,2,3,4 Haokai Zeng1,2,3
Xiaokun Wang1,2,3,5                        Xiaojuan Ban1,2,3,6

1
  Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for
Materials Genome Engineering,                      Summary
University of Science and Technology               We proposed a novel target-driven fluid simulation method based on the
Beijing, Beijing, China
2
                                                   weighted control model derived from the spatial geometric features of the target
  School of Intelligence Science and
Technology, University of Science and              shape. First, the spatial geometric characteristics of the target model are taken
Technology Beijing, Beijing, China
                                                   into account to set the color field weights of control particles. This enabled the
3
 Key Laboratory of Intelligent Bionic
Unmanned Systems, University of Science            full expression of geometric characteristics of the target model, and improve the
and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China             shape accuracy of controlled fluid. Then, the fluid is controlled to form the target
4
 School of Computer Science, Peking                shape under driving constraints, wherein we proposed a new adaptive constraint
University, Beijing, China
5
  National Centrefor Computer Animation,
                                                   mechanism that enables efficient target shape generation. Finally, a new density
Bournemouth University, Poole, UK                  constraint between the control particles and the controlled fluid particles is pro-
6
 Institute of Materials Intelligent                posed to ensure the incompressibility of fluid during control. Compared to the
Technology, Liaoning Academy of
Materials, Shenyang, China                         state-of-the-art target-driven fluid control methods, our method achieves higher
                                                   precision fluid control with higher efficiency.
Correspondence
Xiaojuan Ban, Beijing Advanced
                                                   KEYWORDS
Innovation Center for Materials Genome
Engineering, University of Science and             smoothed particle hydrodynamics, spatial geometry weighting, target-driven fluid simulation
Technology Beijing, 30 Xueyuan Road,
Haidian District, Beijing, China.
Email: banxj@ustb.edu.cn
Sinuo Liu, School of Computer Science,
Peking University, 5 Yiheyuan Road,
Haidian District, Beijing, China.
Email: sinuoliu@pku.edu.cn

Funding information
Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic
Research Foundation, Grant/Award
Numbers: 2022A1515110350,
2021A1515012285, 2023A1515030177;
H2020 Marie Skłodowska-Curie
Individual Fellowship, Grant/Award
Number: 895941; National Key R&D
Program of China, Grant/Award Number:
2022ZD0118001; National Natural Science
Foundation of China, Grant/Award
Number: U22A2022; Postdoctoral
Innovation Talents Support Program,
Grant/Award Number: BX20220007




Comp Anim Virtual Worlds. 2024;35:e2202.                    wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/cav                 © 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.     1 of 17
https://doi.org/10.1002/cav.2202
2 of 17                                                                                                             ZHOU et al.



1         I N T RO DU CT ION

Target-driven fluid control is a hot topic in Computer Graphics, which creates unique simulation results by driving the
motion of the fluid to form a specific shape. Since only 3D models are required to generate the desired fluid effect, these
methods are widely used in the field of games and films, such as the movie “Terminator”, “Spider-Man-Homecoming”,
and “Frozen”. Besides, the fluid control method can also be used for auxiliary medical research. The symptoms of various
vascular diseases could be obtained by simulating blood flow using a human blood vessel model. However, to generate
the desired visual effect, the time-consuming repeatedly adjusting of a sea of parameters is required. This also makes it
hard to accurately fill fluid into a model with complex spatial geometry features. Therefore, it is of great significance to
propose a fluid-driven method that automatically matches the target shape according to the user’s expectation, and forms
the desired fluid result efficiently and accurately.
    To control the motion of the fluid, Zhang et al.1 applied a constraint driving force to the fluid particles and influence
their velocity. However, it could only generate an approximate surface of a simple toy object, but cannot handle complex
models with a large ratio of surface-to-volume ratio. Lu et al. 2 proposed to drive the movement of fluid more intuitively
by rigging-skinning mechanism. This method is effective, but the flow characteristics tend to be lost due to the dense
sampling of control particles and the excessive control constraints. Schoentgen et al. 3 proposed to make it easier for artists
to achieve their desired effect by using precomputed templates. However, such an expected effect can only be limited to
the existing templates, and the preparation is very time-consuming.
    In order to solve the above problems, we propose a new controllable fluid simulation method driven by a weighted
model of spatial geometric features. Firstly, our proposed weight-based actuation control model tackles the issue of sparse
feature points in model details by applying stronger constraints to areas with fewer feature points and vice versa. This
approach enables the fluid to conform better to the model’s shape, resulting in improved fluid surface generation with
the same computational resources. Secondly, our innovative approach introduces an adaptive driving constraint that can
regulate the constraint range independently, resulting in a significant reduction in the required number of frames for
target model generation. The proposed method generates the controlled result efficiently and effectively by controlling
the driving force between the particles and the fluid through adaptive adjustment. Finally, the conventional approaches
are prone to fluid compression resulting from control constraints, whereas our novel density-driven constraint model
ensures fluid incompressibility and improve the realism of fluid flow, thus offering an improved solution. To summarize,
our main contributions include:

1. A novel target-driven fluid simulation method based on spatial geometry features, which achieves high-precision fluid
   control efficiently, and could maintain subtle details of a complex target model.
2. A novel adaptive constraint model that controls particles based on the distance between fluid particles and control
   particles, which greatly improves the shape forming efficiency.
3. A new density-driven constraint model to ensure the incompressibility of fluid during the control process, and improve
   the realism of fluid flow.


2         RELATED WORK

Target-driven fluid control is an important technology of fluid animation. There are many different approaches to the
study of driving. The following aspects of fluid drive are introduced, including drive the fluid in a static shape (2.1), drive
the fluid in a motion process (2.2), and the fluid controllable simulation system (2.3).


2.1        Drive the fluid in a static shape

2.1.1       Keyframe driven simulation

Keyframe driven simulation is where the final shape of a fluid particle is guided by a specific keyframe. Treuille et al.4
matched a set of sketchy shapes for a given keyframe by applying forces found by using a gradient-based optimizer. Hong
and Kim5 extracted a potential field from static user-defined keyframes during preprocessing and then applied the driving
force to the smoke simulation, proportional to the gradient of this field. Bergou et al.6 took a rough keyframe animation
ZHOU et al.                                                                                                             3 of 17


and augmented it with details from a physical simulation, allowing the artist to choose where to add details. Chu et al.7
implemented the ability to derive plausible velocity fields from a single frame.
    To improve the computing efficiency, Pan et al.8 edit keyframe liquid simulations locally by solving an optimiza-
tion problem on a subset of particles. In addition, in order to improve the efficiency by an order of magnitude, Pan and
Manocha9 decomposed the keyframe animation optimization into two subproblems and solved them with the (ADMM).
Later, Pan et al.10 deformed mesh for simulation where smoke can be driven directly by editing the mesh.


2.1.2          Target model actuation

Target model actuation is the actuation of a fluid to form a desired shape by a specific actuation model or actuation
module. Fattal and Lischinski11 used two forces, a driving force that directs smoke to the density field of the target model
and a smoke aggregation force that prevents smoke diffusion. Raveendran et al.12 took as input a dense sequence of
target-driven meshes and used the velocities of these meshes as boundary conditions for pressure resolution. Zhang et al.1
took a specific model as the driving target, and formed the fluid surface by driving forces including density, spring and
velocity. Cornelis et al.13 realized that the fluid could be converted between the target object and the fluid, enabling a
more efficient and simplified solver. Lu et al.2 also proposed to drive the movement of fluid more intuitively by means of
rigging movement and fluid skin. Schoentgen et al.3 proposed that different driving templates should be prefabricated to
make it easier for artists to achieve the desired effect.


2.2           Drive the fluid in a motion process

2.2.1          Enhance and drive detail

This is achieved by inputting a low-resolution effect, by adding additional detail and extra actuation to enhance the
actuation effect of the fluid. Nielsen et al.14 first simulated high-resolution smoke by tracking low-resolution inputs,
adding additional details while preserving the overall appearance of low-resolution. Since then, they15 have also pro-
posed an improved mathematical model of Eulerian-based simulation, improved the use of steady-state (constant)
guidance that often leads to a lack of sufficient high detail. Later, they also applied these ideas to the driving simulation
of fluids.16
    Through conversion in the frequency domain, Forootaninia et al.17 showed this effect by combining the
high-frequency component of the simulated fluid velocity with the low-frequency component of the input guidance field
in order to simulate the smoke faster and maintain the details of the smoke itself. Sato et al.18 introduced a stream function
based on Forootaninia’s attempt to ensure efficiency and appearance, which could better drive the shape of smoke.


2.2.2          Dynamic physical field driven simulation

It works by attaching an additional physical field to the fluid to drive its flow path. McNamara et al.19 used gradient-based
nonlinear optimization to drive physics-based fluid simulations, which was guided early by adding additional con-
straints to guide the driving fluid. Shi and Yu applied feedback forces in smoke20 and liquid to compensate for the
differences in shape and velocity, matching the controlled fluid to the given target. Sato et al.21 proposed to calculate
the (time-varying) vector potential from a sequence of input velocity field, then deform the vector potential, calculate
the deformed velocity field by using the spin operator on the vector potential. Thuerey22 proposed a mesh-based input
signed distance function to compute dense spatiotemporal deformations, combining data-driven fluid simulation and
interpolation techniques that match and interpolate phenomena with fundamentally different physics. Inglis et al.23
used a first-order Primal-Dual method to minimize the difference between the guided velocity field and the target
velocity field.
    In addition to using material flow fields, Rasmussen et al.24 guided fluid particles through soft or hard constraints
that define several physical properties of fluids by artist-generated control particles. Stomakhin and Selle25 also used
input-driven shapes to enforce boundary conditions and deal with particles reseeding around shapes that describe open
boundaries.
