Received: 30 April 2024    Accepted: 1 May 2024

DOI: 10.1002/cav.2242


S P E C I A L I S S U E PA P E R




Peridynamic-based modeling of elastoplasticity and
fracture dynamics

Haoping Wang1   Xiaokun Wang1    Yanrui Xu1,2                                                   Yalan Zhang1
Chao Yao3  Yu Guo3 Xiaojuan Ban1,4,5,6

1
 School of Intelligence Science and
Technology, University of Science and             Abstract
Technology Beijing, Beijing, China                This paper introduces a particle-based framework for simulating the behavior
2
 Faculty of Science and Engineering,              of elastoplastic materials and the formation of fractures, grounded in Peridy-
University of Groningen, Groningen,
                                                  namic theory. Traditional approaches, such as the Finite Element Method (FEM)
Netherlands
3
 School of Computer and Communication
                                                  and Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH), to modeling elastic materials
Engineering, University of Science and            have primarily relied on discretization techniques and continuous constitutive
Technology Beijing, Beijing, China                model. However, accurately capturing fracture and crack development in elasto-
4
 Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for
                                                  plastic materials poses significant challenges for these conventional models.
Materials Genome Engineering, School of
Intelligence Science and Technology,              Our approach integrates a Peridynamic-based elastic model with a density con-
University of Science and Technology              straint, enhancing stability and realism. We adopt the Von Mises yield criterion
Beijing, Beijing, China
                                                  and a bond stretch criterion to simulate plastic deformation and fracture for-
5
  Key Laboratory of Intelligent Bionic
Unmanned Systems, Ministry of
                                                  mation, respectively. The proposed method stabilizes the elastic model through
Education, University of Science and              a density-based position constraint, while plasticity is modeled using the Von
Technology Beijing, Beijing, China                Mises yield criterion within the bond of particle paris. Fracturing and the
6
 Institute of Materials Intelligent
                                                  generation of fine fragments are facilitated by the fracture criterion and the
Technology, Liaoning Academy of
Materials, Shenyang, China                        application of complementarity operations to the inter-particle connections. Our
                                                  experimental results demonstrate the efficacy of our framework in realistically
Correspondence
                                                  depicting a wide range of material behaviors, including elasticity, plasticity, and
Xiaojuan Ban and Xiaokun Wang, School
of Intelligence Science and Technology,           fracturing, across various scenarios.
University of Science and Technology
Beijing, Beijing, China.                          KEYWORDS
Email: banxj@ustb.edu.cn and                      elastoplastic simulation, fracture, peridynamic
wangxiaokun@ustb.edu.cn

Funding information
National Natural Science Foundation of
China, Grant/Award Numbers: 62332017,
U22A2022, 62376025; National Key
Research and Development Program of
China, Grant/Award Number:
2022ZD0118001; Basic and Applied Basic
Research Foundation of Guangdong
Province, Grant/Award Numbers:
2021A1515012285, 2022A1515110350,
2023A1515030177




Comp Anim Virtual Worlds. 2024;35:e2242.                   wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/cav            © 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.   1 of 16
https://doi.org/10.1002/cav.2242
2 of 16                                                                                                            WANG et al.




1         I N T RO DU CT ION

In recent years, the physically based simulation of elastoplastic behavior and fracture animation has garnered significant
interest, with applications extending to industrial simulations, human-computer interaction, medical surgery simula-
tions, and the modeling of biological soft tissues. Among the traditional simulation methods, mesh-based approaches,
particularly the Finite Element Method (FEM), have been widely utilized for elastoplastic simulations due to their estab-
lished frameworks and accuracy. However, as the complexity of the models increases and issues such as mesh distortion,
damage, and the need for mesh reconstruction arise, these methods often require the use of increasingly smaller time
steps and finer mesh quality to maintain accurate results. This inherent limitation of mesh-based methods has led to
the exploration and subsequent favoring of meshless methods in scenarios where dynamic topology changes and high
degrees of deformation are prevalent.
    Meshless methods, such as Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH)1 from fluid dynamics1 to the simulation of elastic
solids2 has spurred great interest in meshless techniques due to their simplicity, accuracy in model sampling, and a unified
framework for simulating interactions with fluids. These advantages have led to particle-based methods emerging as a
novel approach in recent years. Notably, Müller et al.3 introduce a mesh-free method for simulating stiff elastic and highly
plastic objects, while Becker et al.2 adapt the SPH method for elastic materials. Recent developments in particle-based
SPH methods4–6 have shown significant promise in simulating elastic and fluid phenomena.
    However, these meshless methods rely on classical continuum theory and face challenges with non-uniform particle
sampling and distribution, leading to decreased simulation effectiveness. Furthermore, they struggle with discontin-
uous boundary problems that are inherent to partial derivatives rather than differentials. Recent solutions to these
issues involve creating virtual bonds in SPH7 or employing mass-spring systems,8 which calculate interaction forces
through connected bonds. While increasing the number of adjacent sampling particles can mitigate discontinuity issues,
a comprehensive mathematical theory for these problems remains elusive in these methods.
    Fortunately, Silling et al.9 propose a robust meshless method capable of addressing discontinuous deformation and
damage issues. Peridynamic, as introduced by them, offers an accurate simulation of thermoelastic and fracture damages.
In originally bond-based Peridynamic, the Poisson’s ratio in three-dimensional simulations is limited to 0.25. To overcome
this limitation, state-based Peridynamic is developed, allowing simulations across a broader range of Poisson’s ratios.
Silling et al.10,11 demonstrate the theoretical viability of simulating elastoplastic behavior and fracture damages using this
approach. Building on this foundation, our work integrates Peridynamic into the simulation of elastic materials. Notable
contributions in this domain include the work by Zhu et al.,12 who achieved elastoplastic and fracture effects by modifying
the original Peridynamic formulations for elasticity and employing explicit numerical iteration methods. However, the
small time steps required by their approach result in slow overall simulation speeds. He et al.13,14 implement simulations
of co-rotated elastoplastic viscous flows and hyperelastic energy model-based film simulations, respectively.
    In this paper, we build upon the work of He13 by introducing an elastoplastic solver based on a density constraint to
ensure the stabilization of elastic simulations. Unlike previous methods that focused on viscous flow simulations using
the Drucker-Prager criterion, our approach emphasizes the simulation of fracture effects in elastoplastic solids. We adopt
the Von Mises yield criterion, introduce a complement operation, and achieve the simulation of fracture effects through
the breakage of particle bonds.


2         RELATED WORK

In computer graphics, the simulation of the elastoplastic solids has a long history. Both mesh and meshless methods
have been continuously studied and proposed for better elastoplastic and fracture phenomenon. In this section, we will
introduce some attractive developments in the field of elastoplastic and fracture simulation.


2.1        Eulerian/Lagrangian methods

2.1.1       Eulerian methods

From the perspective of Eulerian method, Finite Element Method15 is widely adopted approach to the simulation
of deformable objects. Irving et al. present a efficient and robust FEM simulation of elastoplastic objects with large
WANG et al.                                                                                                             3 of 16


deformation. In addition, Bargteil et al.16 introduce a plasticity model for large plastic deformations while preserving vol-
ume. Recently, Kugelstadt et al.17 use operator splitting for deformation energy terms and present a improved implicit
Euler method for more efficient and stable corotated FEM simulation.
    In addition to simulating the behavior of elastoplastic materials, FEM has been extended to simulate the fracture of
elastic and brittle materials. O’Brien et al.18 first introduce FEM-based methods to simulate brittle and ductile fracture
of solids. To address the remeshing near fracture and topological, the virtual node approach19 is presented for the FEM
mesh cutting without the need for high-resolution meshes. More recently, the Extended Finite Element Method (XFEM)20
has been purposed with a remeshing-free method and a straightforward, low-cost geometrical cutting algorithm without
additional geometry constructs. XFEM has provided a foundation for further research allowing for more efficient and
robust simulations of material fracture.


2.1.2          Lagrangian methods

As a typical Lagrangian method, Smoothed particle hydrodynamics is originally introduced in fluid simulation1 and
fluid-solid interaction.21 Due to the advantages of Lagrangian method, physical properties could be calculated by approx-
imating the values and their gradient at each particle using values from neighboring particles. Monaghanr et al.22
firstly adapt SPH for simulating inelastic deformable objects. However, the standard SPH kernel gradient evaluation
lacks first-order consistency, causing an inaccurate capture of rotational deformation. Becker et al.2 captain the rotation
with SPH variant of the shape matching method and propose corotational formulation with the linear Cauchy-Green
tensor.
    In recent years, more researches have been studied for SPH methods due to the unified framework of the fluid and
solid interaction. Peer et al.4 use a correction matrix ensure the first-order consistency of the kernel gradient and propose
a implicit linear formulation allowing larger time steps. Subsequently, Kugelstadt et al.5 introduce a penalty force for
the zero-energy mode and purpose a new SPH operator splitting formulation with the volume conserving forces and
stretching forces for the complex and multi-physics scenario. Inspired by the quasi-Newton methods23 and Liu et al.24
work, kee et al.25 solve the optimization problem with the L-BFGS solver and support more complex hyperelastic models
to further speed up the simulation process and details. Wang et al.26 represent elastic objects with anisotropic properties
to further mimic muscle contractions. Besides, Gissler et al.27 propose an elastoplastic SPH approach with two implicit
solvers and simulate various snow effects.


2.2           Hybrid methods

Combining the advantages of Lagrangian and Eulerian methods, Material Point Method (MPM) is a hybrid method which
has been a popular approach to simulating a diverse range of materials in recent years. Stomakhin et al.28 first intro-
duce the MPM method into the snow simulation and incorporate the phase changes of snow. Subsequently, Jiang et al.29
introduce a locally affine description of the velocity to enhance the transfer of information between particles and the
grid. Hu et al.30 replace the shape functions in the stress divergence term with Moving Meast Squares Method (MLS)
and implement the double speed of simulation.Su et al.31 purpose an adaptively updated Lagrangian MPM and recover
MLS-MPM30 by using a completely Eulerian formulation.
    Besides, the fracture crack simulation has been studied by MPM methods in recent. Wolper et al.32 introduce the
continuum Damage Mechanics (CDM) into MPM with integrating a variational approach to crack evolution and an
energy-based criterion for the isotropic fracture. Subsequently, Wolper et al.33 extend the non-local CD-MPM with
anisotropic damage mechanics for the anisotropic fracture of ductile materials. Fan et al.34 has introduced the MPM into
the brittle fracture simulation and achieve better visual effects.


2.3           Peridynamic

Peridyanmic is a non-local method to deal with the discontinues problem in engineering mechanics, and is first purposed
by Silling et al.9 The origin form of Peridynamic is based on the bond,35 which limits the possion rate in 2-D as 0.33 and
