                                                                                                                                        PDF Download
                                                                                                                                        3749538.pdf
                                                                                                                                        05 February 2026
                                                                                                                                        Total Citations: 1
                                                                                                                                        Total Downloads: 571
    .
    .
        Latest updates: hps://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3749538




                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                              Published: 03 September 2025
        .
        .
                                                                                                                              .
    RESEARCH-ARTICLE




                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                              Citation in BibTeX format
    HPIPainting: A Hand-Pen Interaction for VR Painting




                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                              .
    ANG CAI, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China
    .
    CHAO YAO, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China
    .
    HONGJUN LIU, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China
    .
    CHANGSHENG LI, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China
    .
    YONGYUE ZHANG, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China
    .
    YU GUO, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China
    .
    View all
    .
    .
    Open Access Support provided by:
    .
    University of Science and Technology Beijing
    .
                                              Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, Volume 9, Issue 3 (September 2025)
                                                                                                                                       hps://doi.org/10.1145/3749538
                                                                                                                                                     EISSN: 2474-9567
.
HPIPainting: A Hand-Pen Interaction for VR Painting
ANG CAI, School of Computer and Communication Engineering, USTB, China
CHAO YAO∗ , School of Computer and Communication Engineering, USTB, China
HONGJUN LIU, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, USTB, China
CHANGSHENG LI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, USTB, China
YONGYUE ZHANG, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, USTB, China
YU GUO, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, USTB, China
XIAOKUN WANG, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, USTB, China
XIAOJUAN BAN∗ , School of Intelligence Science and Technology, USTB, China
Virtual Reality (VR) painting applications allow users to create visual imagery in 3D space. However, existing bare-hand VR
painting and sketching systems frequently rely on generic hand gestures, which could lead to significant user misunder-
standings. In this paper, we propose HPIPainting, a bare-hand VR painting system that implements a virtual pen interaction
mechanism based on the Hand-Pen Interaction(HPI) paradigm. This paradigm leverages microgesture recognition to integrate
natural pen-grasping gestures into a precise interaction model, enabling users to sketch in 3D space naturally and immersively.
Specifically, we explored the design space for VR painting gestures and filtered out 9 microgestures through subjective
evaluations to control various painting functions, such as start painting, edit, brush adjustment, geometric creation, and grid
operations. Studies demonstrate that HPIPainting improves the immersion, usability, and expressive freedom of bare-hand VR
Painting, it achieves controller-level drawing accuracy with a mean error of 1.21 mm, fast and reliable mode-switching within
222 ms, and significantly higher ratings for ease of use, hand fatigue, and naturalness compared to pinch- and controller-based
input.
CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Virtual reality.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Bare-hand, Hand-Pen Interaction Paradigms, Microgesture, Virtual Pen
ACM Reference Format:
Ang Cai, Chao Yao, Hongjun Liu, Changsheng Li, Yongyue Zhang, Yu Guo, Xiaokun Wang, and Xiaojuan Ban. 2025. HPIPainting:
A Hand-Pen Interaction for VR Painting. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 9, 3, Article 71 (September 2025),
26 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3749538

∗ Corresponding authors.



Authors’ Contact Information: Ang Cai, School of Computer and Communication Engineering, USTB, Beijing, China, M202320931@xs.ustb.
edu.cn; Chao Yao, School of Computer and Communication Engineering, USTB, Beijing, China, yaochao@ustb.edu.cn; Hongjun Liu, School of
Intelligence Science and Technology, USTB, Beijing, China, D202210386@xs.ustb.edu.cn; Changsheng Li, School of Intelligence Science and
Technology, USTB, Beijing, China, M202320825@xs.ustb.edu.cn; Yongyue Zhang, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, USTB, Beijing,
China, M202421746@xs.ustb.edu.cn; Yu Guo, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, USTB, Beijing, China, guoyu@ustb.edu.cn;
Xiaokun Wang, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, USTB, Beijing, China, wangxiaokun@ustb.edu.cn; Xiaojuan Ban, School of
Intelligence Science and Technology, USTB, Beijing, China, banxj@ustb.edu.cn.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from
permissions@acm.org.
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 2474-9567/2025/9-ART71
https://doi.org/10.1145/3749538


                        Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 3, Article 71. Publication date: September 2025.
71:2   •   Cai et al.




Fig. 1. HPIPainting’s design concept: By recognizing microgestures in users’ pen-holding postures in real-time to change
virtual pen states, the system maps common drawing operations (adjusting brush size/type, undo/redo, start drawing, and
call out menu) in 3D space to corresponding virtual pen states. Using the virtual pen as a painting agent, users can create
naturally and intuitively in both 2D canvas and 3D space.


1      INTRODUCTION
The rapid development of Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR) technology has opened up new
possibilities for creative expression in various artistic fields such as painting, sketching, and 3D modeling. The
immersive environments and natural gesture interactions provided by VR technology have changed the way
artists and designers create and share their ideas. Among these creative activities, bare-hand sketching plays a
crucial role in the early stages of design, enabling the rapid exploration and communication of concepts [44, 53].
   Existing bare-hand VR sketching and painting systems primarily employ hardware-based methods to enable
creative interactions, such as handheld controllers with 6 DoF [38], stylus-like tools [24], or VR tablets [1]. These
controller-based interactions often necessitate that users monitor the on-screen cursor movement while also
assessing the motion of the device beyond their direct line of sight. This disconnection between visual input and
physical action demands a heightened level of attention for users to coordinate the two, thereby increasing their
cognitive load. These controller-based approaches may not provide the most natural and immersive experience
for bare-hand sketching and painting in VR.
   Recent research has explored the potential of bare-hand interaction as an alternative to controller-based
methods for VR painting and sketching [5, 10, 51]. These approaches typically rely on using fingertips or the
entire finger as a brush, recognizing actions such as fingertip pinching or index finger bending to draw lines
in 3D space [15, 21, 37]. However, the gestures used in these systems are generally generic bare-hand input
gestures rather than being specifically d esigned f or p ainting t asks. As a r esult, t hey t end t o b e ambiguous
and cognitively demanding when applied to creative drawing scenarios. This mismatch increases the risk of
gesture misrecognition and hinders the user’s ability to perform fine-grained, multi-step operations required in
professional VR painting. Prolonged use of such general-purpose gestures can lead to increased cognitive load,
thereby reducing usability and making it difficult to accurately interpret user intentions or support complex
interaction workflows [2]. To achieve bare-hand interaction in professional VR painting applications where
users need to use multiple tools and control methods, developing an interaction paradigm that aligns with user
cognition and accurately controls complex painting processes is crucial. Therefore, we propose a bare-hand 3D
painting method based on natural painting gestures.
   This paper presents HPIPainting, a novel bare-hand painting system in virtual reality that enables 3D drawing
through the use of a virtual pen. Inspired by real-world 3D printing pens, HPIPainting introduces a new interaction
paradigm called Hand Pen Interaction (HPI), which leverages microgesture recognition to integrate natural
pen-grasping gestures with a virtual pen as the primary interaction agent. We explored the design space of VR

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 3, Article 71. Publication date: September 2025.
